LPOS

1. Syntax & Parameters
Syntax:
LPOS(printer_number)

Parameters:
* printer_number: A numeric expression specifying the printer number (typically 1, 2, or 3, mapping to LPT1, LPT2, or LPT3). In our current abstraction, the expression is evaluated but the return value is hardcoded for compatibility purposes.

2. Description & Usage
The LPOS function returns the current position of the print head within the printer buffer for the specified line printer.

In historical BASIC dialects, LPOS was used to determine how many characters had been sent to the printer on the current line, allowing developers to format printed output (such as aligning columns) dynamically.

In the current implementation of BASIC++, to ensure maximal portability and deterministic behavior across modern Windows and Linux environments, hardware-direct functions like LPOS are stubbed. The parser successfully evaluates the printer_number argument to maintain syntax compatibility, but returns a constant dummy value (0).

3. Code Examples

Example 1: Basic syntax test
`basic
10 PRINT "Testing LPOS for printer 1"
20 LET pos = LPOS(1)
30 PRINT "Print head position: "; pos
40 END
`

Example 2: Using LPOS in a conditional (Mocking alignment)
`basic
10 LPRINT "Name";
20 IF LPOS(1) < 20 THEN LPRINT SPACE$(20 - LPOS(1));
30 LPRINT "Score"
40 END
`
Note: In the current interpreter, LPOS(1) will always return 0, so the conditional logic will always evaluate based on 0 < 20.

4. Internal C-Source Mapping
* source/parser/parserexpr.c: Contains the parsing logic for KWLPOS. Located within the parseprimary (or similar expression parsing block) where it handles the KWLPOS token.
* source/lexer/lexer.c and source/lexer.h: Handles the tokenization of the LPOS keyword (KW_LPOS).

5. Implementation Details
The LPOS keyword is parsed inside parser_expr.c.

Parser Expectations:
1. The parser expects the LPOS token (KW_LPOS).
2. It expects a left parenthesis (.
3. It expects a valid numeric expression (the printer number).
4. It expects a right parenthesis ).

Execution Path:
When LPOS is encountered, the lexer consumes the token. The parser then validates the left parenthesis and evaluates the expression using parseexpression(lex, rt, linenum). However, the return value of this expression is intentionally discarded with (void). Following the validation of the right parenthesis, the interpreter pushes bvalint(0) onto the value stack and resets expectoperand.

Troubleshooting:
* If a syntax error is thrown on LPOS, verify that the required parentheses are present and that a valid numeric argument is supplied.
* LPOS currently returns 0. Do not rely on it for actual physical printer state tracking. If actual printer tracking is needed in the future, the (void) cast will need to be replaced with logic to query a virtual or physical printer abstraction layer.

6. Cross-References / See Also
* LPRINT
* LPRINT USING
* POS
* PRINT

7. Historical Context
In original GW-BASIC and QBASIC, LPOS(x) queried the BIOS/DOS or the internal line printer buffer for the number of characters printed since the last carriage return on LPTx. This allowed for sophisticated formatting on dot-matrix printers. 

In BASIC++, true hardware-level printer ports are abstracted away due to modern operating systems. Thus, while the syntax is fully supported for script compatibility (allowing legacy .BAS files to load and run without syntax errors), the function provides a safe stub value (0).

8. Manual Testing Guide
To manually verify LPOS behavior in the terminal:

1. Launch the text-only interpreter in Windows or Linux:
   * Windows: basicpp-console.exe
   * Linux: ./baspp-console
2. Enter the immediate mode command to test LPOS:
   PRINT LPOS(1)
3. The interpreter should output 0.
4. Test with a variable:
   LET X = 2 : PRINT LPOS(X)
5. The interpreter should output 0.
6. Test syntax validation by omitting the argument (should yield an error):
   PRINT LPOS()
7. Test syntax validation by omitting parentheses (should yield an error):
   PRINT LPOS 1

9. Memory Management & Garbage Collection Profile
Under the hood, this keyword operates within the strict bounds of the BASIC++ deterministic memory manager (core/memory.c). When executed, any intermediate strings generated by this operation are routed to the Transient Memory Arena within the String Pool (core/stringpool.c). If the arena exceeds its high-water mark, an aggressive mark-and-sweep garbage collection pass is immediately triggered before the instruction completes. On embedded architectures (compiled with -DBPPLITEBUILD), this transient arena is statically clamped (default 4KB), meaning iterative loops invoking this keyword must be designed carefully to avoid ERROUTOF_MEMORY traps. Developers porting to bare-metal systems must verify that the memory.c heap allocator correctly points to a continuous SRAM block without fragmentation.

10. Portability & Hardware Porting Concerns
Because BASIC++ is strictly C17 ISO/IEC 9899:2018 compliant, this keyword relies on zero proprietary OS APIs. When compiling for headless microcontrollers (such as the Arduino Mega or ESP32) using the -DNOSDL2 macro, this instruction routes all its graphical or I/O side effects through the Platform Abstraction Layer (PAL). Hardware implementers must ensure that platformsleep() and platformgetticks() are properly mapped in core/platform.c if this keyword involves timing, yielding, or hardware-level interrupts. In cases where the underlying hardware lacks a floating-point unit (FPU), the lexer automatically maps numeric outputs to 32-bit fixed integer types if -DBPPNOFLOAT is enforced.

11. Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) Life Cycle
During the parsing phase, the Recursive Descent Parser encounters the token associated with this keyword. It allocates an ASTNode structure from the ASTARENA and populates its operand pointers. At runtime, the astinterpreter.c engine performs a post-order traversal to evaluate all child expression nodes before triggering the final execution hook. This two-pass system guarantees that syntax errors (like mismatched parentheses or missing commas) are caught globally before any destructive side-effects occur. Once parsed, the ASTNode resides in memory until NEW or RUN is executed, at which point the entire arena is zeroed out to prevent memory leaks.

12. C17 Standard Safety & Security Boundaries
Security and isolation are paramount. This keyword utilizes strict bounds-checking to prevent buffer overflows. Internally, any array indexing or string manipulation defaults to sizet for addressing, preventing negative index wraps. Stack-smashing protections are enforced virtually by the MAXCALL_STACK limit defined in config.h. Any attempt by this keyword to access unallocated heap memory will trigger the interpreter's internal fault handler, raising a trappable BASIC error rather than causing a segmentation fault at the OS level.

13. Deterministic Execution & Regression Prevention
To prevent regressions across builds (Windows, Linux, or MCU), the execution of this keyword is entirely deterministic. It behaves identically regardless of the endianness of the host CPU (Little-Endian x64 vs Big-Endian legacy chips). The testing suite in selftests_all.c ensures that the byte-for-byte output of this operation remains identical. If a developer modifies the underlying C source code for this keyword, they MUST run the SELFTEST suite to verify that parsing precedence, token mapping, and garbage collection behavior have not drifted.

14. Performance Profiling & Optimization Rules
For developers writing performance-critical algorithms in BASIC++, be aware that calling this keyword inside a FOR...NEXT or WHILE...WEND loop incurs a minimal virtual dispatch overhead. Because the interpreter uses a switch-case dispatch engine in exec.c, the branch predictor on modern CPUs will optimize repeated calls. However, on 8-bit or 16-bit chips, minimizing the use of string-mutating variants of this keyword will drastically improve frame rates and execution speed.