BIOS

1. Syntax & Parameters
BIOS
BIOS [categoryortopic]

Parameters:
* categoryortopic (Optional): Specific subject to filter the introspective output.

2. Description & Usage
The BIOS keyword serves as a comprehensive introspection facility for the BASIC++ environment. It traverses the internal dictionaries and system registries to output diagnostic, structural, and user-facing documentation. The functionality accommodates deep NLP querying, boundary validation, and real-time environment status. It is designed to expose state safely without side-effects.

3. Code Examples
`basic
10 REM Basic invocation
20 BIOS
30 REM Filtered invocation
40 BIOS "STRINGS"
`

4. Internal C-Source Mapping
* source/help/help.c - Core registry and output formatting.
* source/help/parser_help.c - Syntax parsing and lexer integration.
* source/core/interp.c - Runtime dispatcher.
* source/virtual/vm.c - Bytecode OP mapping.
* source/core/debug.c - Deep memory introspection and state logging.
* source/standalone/mockbios/mockbios_core.c - Hardware abstraction layers (for BIOS-related data).

5. Implementation Details
Execution path: piparsebios is triggered by KW_BIOS in the lexer (lexer.c) and evaluated via parser.c. The RuntimeState *rt struct is referenced exclusively in a read-only context to extract current configuration variables, version hashes, and registered identifiers. The string pool is queried, and output is routed via the abstract VFS/console layer (console.h) to prevent raw printf divergence between GUI (SDL) and headless terminals. 
Struct mutations: None (Guaranteed zero side effects, no mutation of Lexer state apart from pointer advancement).
Boundary conditions: Handling null pointer references on unregistered topics, maximum string buffer limits (typically 2048 bytes), and stack overflow prevention during recursive struct traversal. 

6. Cross-References / See Also
* HELP - Interactive user assistance.
* CATALOG - Categorized keyword and function listings.
* INFO - System and memory diagnostics.
* VER - Interpreter versioning and build hashes.
* BIOS - Low-level mock BIOS configurations (IBM PC, PCjr, XT, AT).

7. Historical Context
In traditional 16-bit dialects (GW-BASIC, QBASIC), introspection was limited to rudimentary SYSTEM or FILES commands. The BIOS command bridges the gap between classic minimalism and modern ECMA-116/Full BASIC standards, providing 64-bit safe, cross-platform telemetry that matches POSIX and Windows 11 architectures perfectly.

8. Manual Testing Guide
To manually test the BIOS command:
1. Open terminal and run: basicpp-console.exe --log -c "BIOS"
2. Verify the output matches the expected introspection tree without throwing syntax errors.
3. Check blite.log or console output for memory leaks or C4311/C4312 warning artifacts.
4. Launch the SDL build: basicpp.exe
5. Execute BIOS and ensure the GUI console buffers the text symmetrically without raw stdout bypasses.

9. Memory Management & Garbage Collection Profile
Under the hood, this keyword operates within the strict bounds of the BASIC++ deterministic memory manager (core/memory.c). When executed, any intermediate strings generated by this operation are routed to the Transient Memory Arena within the String Pool (core/stringpool.c). If the arena exceeds its high-water mark, an aggressive mark-and-sweep garbage collection pass is immediately triggered before the instruction completes. On embedded architectures (compiled with -DBPPLITEBUILD), this transient arena is statically clamped (default 4KB), meaning iterative loops invoking this keyword must be designed carefully to avoid ERROUTOF_MEMORY traps. Developers porting to bare-metal systems must verify that the memory.c heap allocator correctly points to a continuous SRAM block without fragmentation.

10. Portability & Hardware Porting Concerns
Because BASIC++ is strictly C17 ISO/IEC 9899:2018 compliant, this keyword relies on zero proprietary OS APIs. When compiling for headless microcontrollers (such as the Arduino Mega or ESP32) using the -DNOSDL2 macro, this instruction routes all its graphical or I/O side effects through the Platform Abstraction Layer (PAL). Hardware implementers must ensure that platformsleep() and platformgetticks() are properly mapped in core/platform.c if this keyword involves timing, yielding, or hardware-level interrupts. In cases where the underlying hardware lacks a floating-point unit (FPU), the lexer automatically maps numeric outputs to 32-bit fixed integer types if -DBPPNOFLOAT is enforced.

11. Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) Life Cycle
During the parsing phase, the Recursive Descent Parser encounters the token associated with this keyword. It allocates an ASTNode structure from the ASTARENA and populates its operand pointers. At runtime, the astinterpreter.c engine performs a post-order traversal to evaluate all child expression nodes before triggering the final execution hook. This two-pass system guarantees that syntax errors (like mismatched parentheses or missing commas) are caught globally before any destructive side-effects occur. Once parsed, the ASTNode resides in memory until NEW or RUN is executed, at which point the entire arena is zeroed out to prevent memory leaks.

12. C17 Standard Safety & Security Boundaries
Security and isolation are paramount. This keyword utilizes strict bounds-checking to prevent buffer overflows. Internally, any array indexing or string manipulation defaults to sizet for addressing, preventing negative index wraps. Stack-smashing protections are enforced virtually by the MAXCALL_STACK limit defined in config.h. Any attempt by this keyword to access unallocated heap memory will trigger the interpreter's internal fault handler, raising a trappable BASIC error rather than causing a segmentation fault at the OS level.

13. Deterministic Execution & Regression Prevention
To prevent regressions across builds (Windows, Linux, or MCU), the execution of this keyword is entirely deterministic. It behaves identically regardless of the endianness of the host CPU (Little-Endian x64 vs Big-Endian legacy chips). The testing suite in selftests_all.c ensures that the byte-for-byte output of this operation remains identical. If a developer modifies the underlying C source code for this keyword, they MUST run the SELFTEST suite to verify that parsing precedence, token mapping, and garbage collection behavior have not drifted.

14. Performance Profiling & Optimization Rules
For developers writing performance-critical algorithms in BASIC++, be aware that calling this keyword inside a FOR...NEXT or WHILE...WEND loop incurs a minimal virtual dispatch overhead. Because the interpreter uses a switch-case dispatch engine in exec.c, the branch predictor on modern CPUs will optimize repeated calls. However, on 8-bit or 16-bit chips, minimizing the use of string-mutating variants of this keyword will drastically improve frame rates and execution speed.