ASSERT

1. Syntax & Parameters
ASSERT expression [, "error_message"]

Parameters:
- expression: A numeric expression (boolean condition) evaluated at runtime. Any non-zero value is considered True (pass), while a zero value is considered False (fail).
- "error_message" (Optional): A string literal or variable that provides custom context or a description printed to the console when the assertion fails.

2. Description & Usage
The ASSERT statement is an advanced diagnostic and unit testing tool embedded directly into the BASIC++ syntax. It allows programmers to assert that a specific condition must be true at a given point in execution. If the condition evaluates to true, the program continues silently with no interruption. If the condition evaluates to false (zero), the interpreter halts program execution and throws an assertion error, typically printing the line number and the optional custom error message.

This feature facilitates the creation of robust unit tests and invariant checks during development, ensuring that variables and system states align with developer expectations.

Usage:
- Validate function arguments or subroutine inputs to ensure they fall within acceptable ranges.
- Construct comprehensive automated test scripts using standard BASIC code.
- Verify invariants in loop bodies or complex state machines.
- Ensure file handlers, memory pointers, or system resources are successfully initialized.

Edge Cases & Boundary Conditions:
- Floating Point Equality: Asserting exact equality on floating-point variables (e.g., ASSERT A! = 1.23) is dangerous due to precision issues. It may randomly fail. Programmers should assert within a tolerance (e.g., ASSERT ABS(A! - 1.23) < 0.0001).
- Missing Optional Argument: If the optional "error_message" is omitted, the interpreter must supply a generic default message, such as "Assertion failed on line X".
- String Conditionals: Passing a direct string into the condition argument (e.g., ASSERT "True") without an operator will trigger a Type Mismatch error before the assertion logic can even evaluate.
- Complex Expressions: The expression might involve function calls (ASSERT FN_CHECK(X)). If the function call has side effects, those side effects will execute even if the assertion passes.

Side Effects:
- If the assertion fails, the execution terminates immediately and control returns to the interpreter's REPL (immediate mode) or exits the script.
- Evaluating the condition may allocate temporary memory in the math or string evaluation stacks, which is immediately garbage collected.

Behavior Constraints:
- Must be used as a standalone statement on a line or separated by a colon (:).
- ASSERT cannot be dynamically caught using ON ERROR GOTO unless explicitly configured to throw a standard runtime error rather than a fatal fault. By default, assertions bypass standard error handlers to ensure test failures are visible.

3. Code Examples

Example 1: Basic Invariant Checking
`basic
10 LET X = 10
20 LET Y = 5
30 REM Ensure Y is never zero before division
40 ASSERT Y <> 0, "Y must not be zero before division!"
50 LET Z = X / Y
60 PRINT Z
`
Expected Output:
`
 2
`

Example 2: Failing an Assertion
`basic
10 LET AGE = -5
20 ASSERT AGE >= 0, "Age cannot be negative."
30 PRINT "This line will never execute."
`
Expected Output:
`
Assertion Failed on Line 20: Age cannot be negative.
`

Example 3: Complex Subroutine Validation
`basic
100 GOSUB 500
110 ASSERT RESULT_CODE = 200, "Subroutine 500 did not return success code 200"
120 END
500 REM Perform some task
510 RESULT_CODE = 404
520 RETURN
`

4. Internal C-Source Mapping
- source/parser/assert_parser.c
- source/virtual/assert_vm.c
- source/virtual/error_handler.c

5. Implementation Details
The ASSERT instruction is identified during the Lexer phase as KWASSERT. The Parser expects an expression node, followed optionally by a comma token (TOKCOMMA) and a string expression node.

Struct Mutations:
- The evaluator evaluates the first AST node (the condition). The resulting VALUE_STRUCT is coerced to a boolean or integer format.
- If the value is non-zero, the execution pointer (rt->pc) advances without further mutation.
- If the value is zero, the evaluator evaluates the second AST node (if present) to retrieve the error string. It then mutates rt->state to an error state (e.g., STATEHALTED or STATEERROR), populates rt->lasterror with ERRASSERTION_FAILED, and halts the virtual machine execution loop.

Execution Paths:
- Lexer: Reads "ASSERT", creates KW_ASSERT.
- Parser: Parses NODE_ASSERT, attaching left (condition) and right (message) children.
- Evaluator: Evaluates left. If false, evaluates right (if exists), formats the error string, calls throwfatalerror(), and aborts execution.

Troubleshooting & Mutability:
- What can be changed: The format of the output failure message can be modified in the C source to include more debugging context (like variable dumps).
- What cannot be changed: The strict evaluation of the condition must not be skipped. The comma delimiter between the condition and the string must remain strictly enforced by the parser.
- If it breaks: If assertions never fail even when they should, verify that the condition evaluator is correctly casting floating-point values to boolean equivalents. If passing an assertion causes a syntax error, check if the parser's expectation of the optional comma and string is overly strict.

6. Cross-References / See Also
- SELFTEST
- ON ERROR
- ERROR

7. Historical Context
Unlike TRON, ASSERT is not a traditional GW-BASIC or QBASIC keyword. It has been introduced in BASIC++ to support modern software engineering practices, specifically automated unit testing and robust invariant checking directly within BASIC scripts, aligning it with modern languages like C, Python, and Java.

8. Manual Testing Guide
To manually verify ASSERT functionality without the automated Python suite:
1. Launch basicpp-console.exe.
2. Type the following program:
   10 ASSERT 1 = 1, "Math is broken"
   20 PRINT "Pass 1"
   30 ASSERT 1 = 2, "Math is still broken"
   40 PRINT "Pass 2"
3. Type RUN and press Enter.
4. Verify that the output shows Pass 1.
5. Verify that the execution halts immediately after and displays the assertion failure: Assertion Failed on Line 30: Math is still broken (or the equivalent interpreter error output).
6. Verify that Pass 2 is never printed.

9. Memory Management & Garbage Collection Profile
Under the hood, this keyword operates within the strict bounds of the BASIC++ deterministic memory manager (core/memory.c). When executed, any intermediate strings generated by this operation are routed to the Transient Memory Arena within the String Pool (core/stringpool.c). If the arena exceeds its high-water mark, an aggressive mark-and-sweep garbage collection pass is immediately triggered before the instruction completes. On embedded architectures (compiled with -DBPPLITEBUILD), this transient arena is statically clamped (default 4KB), meaning iterative loops invoking this keyword must be designed carefully to avoid ERROUTOF_MEMORY traps. Developers porting to bare-metal systems must verify that the memory.c heap allocator correctly points to a continuous SRAM block without fragmentation.

10. Portability & Hardware Porting Concerns
Because BASIC++ is strictly C17 ISO/IEC 9899:2018 compliant, this keyword relies on zero proprietary OS APIs. When compiling for headless microcontrollers (such as the Arduino Mega or ESP32) using the -DNOSDL2 macro, this instruction routes all its graphical or I/O side effects through the Platform Abstraction Layer (PAL). Hardware implementers must ensure that platformsleep() and platformgetticks() are properly mapped in core/platform.c if this keyword involves timing, yielding, or hardware-level interrupts. In cases where the underlying hardware lacks a floating-point unit (FPU), the lexer automatically maps numeric outputs to 32-bit fixed integer types if -DBPPNOFLOAT is enforced.

11. Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) Life Cycle
During the parsing phase, the Recursive Descent Parser encounters the token associated with this keyword. It allocates an ASTNode structure from the ASTARENA and populates its operand pointers. At runtime, the astinterpreter.c engine performs a post-order traversal to evaluate all child expression nodes before triggering the final execution hook. This two-pass system guarantees that syntax errors (like mismatched parentheses or missing commas) are caught globally before any destructive side-effects occur. Once parsed, the ASTNode resides in memory until NEW or RUN is executed, at which point the entire arena is zeroed out to prevent memory leaks.

12. C17 Standard Safety & Security Boundaries
Security and isolation are paramount. This keyword utilizes strict bounds-checking to prevent buffer overflows. Internally, any array indexing or string manipulation defaults to sizet for addressing, preventing negative index wraps. Stack-smashing protections are enforced virtually by the MAXCALL_STACK limit defined in config.h. Any attempt by this keyword to access unallocated heap memory will trigger the interpreter's internal fault handler, raising a trappable BASIC error rather than causing a segmentation fault at the OS level.

13. Deterministic Execution & Regression Prevention
To prevent regressions across builds (Windows, Linux, or MCU), the execution of this keyword is entirely deterministic. It behaves identically regardless of the endianness of the host CPU (Little-Endian x64 vs Big-Endian legacy chips). The testing suite in selftests_all.c ensures that the byte-for-byte output of this operation remains identical. If a developer modifies the underlying C source code for this keyword, they MUST run the SELFTEST suite to verify that parsing precedence, token mapping, and garbage collection behavior have not drifted.

14. Performance Profiling & Optimization Rules
For developers writing performance-critical algorithms in BASIC++, be aware that calling this keyword inside a FOR...NEXT or WHILE...WEND loop incurs a minimal virtual dispatch overhead. Because the interpreter uses a switch-case dispatch engine in exec.c, the branch predictor on modern CPUs will optimize repeated calls. However, on 8-bit or 16-bit chips, minimizing the use of string-mutating variants of this keyword will drastically improve frame rates and execution speed.