RESTORE

1. Syntax & Parameters
RESTORE [line_number | label]

*   line_number: (Optional) An integer literal representing a valid line number in the current program where DATA statements exist.
*   label: (Optional) An alphanumeric label representing a specific section of the program.

2. Description & Usage
The RESTORE command alters the internal DATA pointer, changing the sequence of where the next READ statement will fetch its values from. 

Usage:
When called without arguments, RESTORE resets the internal data pointer back to the very first DATA constant in the program. When called with a line number or label, it sets the data pointer to the first DATA constant at or immediately following that specific line/label. This allows developers to reuse DATA sets, or categorize different DATA sets into logical blocks and retrieve them selectively.

Edge Cases & Boundary Conditions:
*   Invalid Line/Label: If a linenumber or label is provided that does not exist in the program, an ERRUNDEFINEDLINE or ERRUNDEFINED_LABEL is thrown at runtime.
*   No Data After Restore Point: If RESTORE is called to a valid line number, but no DATA statements exist on or after that line, the pointer is set to EOF (End of File). The next READ command will immediately trigger an ERROUTOF_DATA.
*   Restore Without Data: If the program contains no DATA statements at all, RESTORE executes successfully but the pointer remains null. 

3. Code Examples

Basic RESTORE (Reset to Beginning):
`basic
10 READ A, B
20 RESTORE
30 READ C, D
40 PRINT A; B; C; D
50 DATA 1, 2, 3, 4
`
Output:  1 2 1 2  (Values 3 and 4 are never read)

RESTORE to a Specific Line Number:
`basic
10 RESTORE 50
20 READ X, Y
30 PRINT X; Y
40 DATA 9, 8
50 DATA 7, 6
`
Output:  7 6 

RESTORE to a Label:
`basic
10 RESTORE LevelTwo
20 READ MAPID
30 PRINT "Loading Map: "; MAPID
40 END
50 LevelOne:
60 DATA 101
70 LevelTwo:
80 DATA 202
`

4. Internal C-Source Mapping
*   source/parser/parser_statements.c
*   source/runtime/runtime.c
*   source/virtual/vm.c
*   include/lexer.h

5. Implementation Details
The RESTORE instruction is identified in the Lexer by the KW_RESTORE token.

Parser Expectations:
The parser optionally expects a single argument resolving to an integer literal (line number) or string (label). It compiles this into an AST_RESTORE node.

Struct Mutations:
*   Data Pointer (rt->data_ptr): Mutated to point to the DATA stream element corresponding to the beginning of the program, or the specific line/label provided.

Execution Paths & Error Handling:
1. Check if the AST_RESTORE node has an argument.
2. If no argument, set rt->dataptr = rt->datahead.
3. If an argument exists, consult the global linemap or labelmap.
4. If the target does not exist, throw ERRUNDEFINEDLINE.
5. If the target exists, traverse the AST sequentially from that target node until the first AST_DATA node is found.
6. Set rt->dataptr to the head of the data constants associated with that ASTDATA node. If no subsequent DATA node exists, set rt->data_ptr = NULL.

What to do if it breaks:
If RESTORE to a specific line number fails to reset the data pointer correctly, check the AST traversal logic inside the ASTRESTORE executor in runtime.c. The executor must sequentially search forward in the AST from the requested line number until it encounters the next DATA statement. Ensure the global linemap index is providing the correct starting node.

6. Cross-References / See Also
*   DATA
*   READ

7. Historical Context
The ability to RESTORE to a specific line number was introduced in extended BASICs (like Microsoft BASIC) to give developers the flexibility to group static data hierarchically, rather than forcing a strict global sequential access pattern. BASIC++ fully supports this ECMA-116 and QBASIC capability.

8. Manual Testing Guide
1. Launch basicpp-console.exe (Windows) or baspp-console (Linux).
2. To test standard reset, type:
   `
   10 READ A
   20 RESTORE
   30 READ B
   40 PRINT A; B
   50 DATA 100, 200
   `
   Type RUN. Output must be 100 100.
3. To test RESTORE to line number, type:
   `
   10 RESTORE 40
   20 READ A
   30 PRINT A
   40 DATA 50
   50 DATA 60
   `
   Type RUN. Output must be 50.
4. To test RESTORE to an invalid line, type:
   `
   10 RESTORE 999
   `
   Type RUN. Ensure it throws ERRUNDEFINEDLINE.

9. Memory Management & Garbage Collection Profile
Under the hood, this keyword operates within the strict bounds of the BASIC++ deterministic memory manager (core/memory.c). When executed, any intermediate strings generated by this operation are routed to the Transient Memory Arena within the String Pool (core/stringpool.c). If the arena exceeds its high-water mark, an aggressive mark-and-sweep garbage collection pass is immediately triggered before the instruction completes. On embedded architectures (compiled with -DBPPLITEBUILD), this transient arena is statically clamped (default 4KB), meaning iterative loops invoking this keyword must be designed carefully to avoid ERROUTOF_MEMORY traps. Developers porting to bare-metal systems must verify that the memory.c heap allocator correctly points to a continuous SRAM block without fragmentation.

10. Portability & Hardware Porting Concerns
Because BASIC++ is strictly C17 ISO/IEC 9899:2018 compliant, this keyword relies on zero proprietary OS APIs. When compiling for headless microcontrollers (such as the Arduino Mega or ESP32) using the -DNOSDL2 macro, this instruction routes all its graphical or I/O side effects through the Platform Abstraction Layer (PAL). Hardware implementers must ensure that platformsleep() and platformgetticks() are properly mapped in core/platform.c if this keyword involves timing, yielding, or hardware-level interrupts. In cases where the underlying hardware lacks a floating-point unit (FPU), the lexer automatically maps numeric outputs to 32-bit fixed integer types if -DBPPNOFLOAT is enforced.

11. Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) Life Cycle
During the parsing phase, the Recursive Descent Parser encounters the token associated with this keyword. It allocates an ASTNode structure from the ASTARENA and populates its operand pointers. At runtime, the astinterpreter.c engine performs a post-order traversal to evaluate all child expression nodes before triggering the final execution hook. This two-pass system guarantees that syntax errors (like mismatched parentheses or missing commas) are caught globally before any destructive side-effects occur. Once parsed, the ASTNode resides in memory until NEW or RUN is executed, at which point the entire arena is zeroed out to prevent memory leaks.

12. C17 Standard Safety & Security Boundaries
Security and isolation are paramount. This keyword utilizes strict bounds-checking to prevent buffer overflows. Internally, any array indexing or string manipulation defaults to sizet for addressing, preventing negative index wraps. Stack-smashing protections are enforced virtually by the MAXCALL_STACK limit defined in config.h. Any attempt by this keyword to access unallocated heap memory will trigger the interpreter's internal fault handler, raising a trappable BASIC error rather than causing a segmentation fault at the OS level.

13. Deterministic Execution & Regression Prevention
To prevent regressions across builds (Windows, Linux, or MCU), the execution of this keyword is entirely deterministic. It behaves identically regardless of the endianness of the host CPU (Little-Endian x64 vs Big-Endian legacy chips). The testing suite in selftests_all.c ensures that the byte-for-byte output of this operation remains identical. If a developer modifies the underlying C source code for this keyword, they MUST run the SELFTEST suite to verify that parsing precedence, token mapping, and garbage collection behavior have not drifted.

14. Performance Profiling & Optimization Rules
For developers writing performance-critical algorithms in BASIC++, be aware that calling this keyword inside a FOR...NEXT or WHILE...WEND loop incurs a minimal virtual dispatch overhead. Because the interpreter uses a switch-case dispatch engine in exec.c, the branch predictor on modern CPUs will optimize repeated calls. However, on 8-bit or 16-bit chips, minimizing the use of string-mutating variants of this keyword will drastically improve frame rates and execution speed.