RAMBANKS

1. Syntax & Parameters
--init-rambanks <N> (Command Line Switch)
- N: Number of RAM banks to allocate (16-bit unsigned integer, max 65535).
- If the flag is omitted, the interpreter defaults to 64 RAM banks (providing sixty-four 1MB chunks of memory).

2. Description & Usage
RAMBANKs provide a virtualized segmented memory abstraction layer for BASIC++. They function by allocating discrete chunks of memory (banks) that are managed by the interpreter's internal MemorySystem. These banks allow users and internal subsystems to read/write raw memory bytes through built-in keywords such as PEEK, POKE, BPEEK, and BPOKE.

RAMBANKs integrate directly with the interpreter's 'mock' BIOS (which can be configured to mimic IBM PC, PCjr, XT, or AT architectures). The 'mock' BIOS manages memory mapping across the allocated banks to simulate hardware interrupts, video memory mapping (like CGA/MDA buffers), and system ROM/RAM footprints without risking illegal memory access on the modern 64-bit host OS. 

Because we target modern systems (Windows 11, Linux, BSD), the number of RAM banks is fully dynamic. However, to maintain stability and integration with the legacy 16-bit abstraction of the mock BIOS, the maximum hard upper limit of allocated RAM banks is capped at 65,535 (a 16-bit unsigned integer).

3. Code Examples
`basic
REM Example of writing and reading across RAMBANKS
DEFINT A-Z
REM Switch to a specific memory segment (e.g. video RAM mapped in mock BIOS)
DEF SEG = &HB800 

REM Poke a character into the active segment/bank
POKE 0, 65

REM Read the value back out
A = PEEK(0)
PRINT "Read back: "; A
`

4. Internal C-Source Mapping
Implemented within source/core/memory.c, source/memory.h, source/core/main.c, and mapped into virtual space via source/virtual/vmem.c. Command line parsing occurs in source/core/main.c.

5. Implementation Details
The RAMBANK system was refactored to dynamically allocate mem->banks as a pointer (RamBank *banks) via calloc, scaling efficiently to user requirements rather than maintaining a hard-coded array. The global variable ginitrambanks controls this sizing, defaulting to 64.

Bounds checking is enforced strictly at the command line parser level (capping at 65535) and during initialization in rambankinit() to prevent memory exhaustion (OOM). On interpreter shutdown, rambankshutdown() calls free(mem->banks) to cleanly discard the allocated memory across all targets.

6. Cross-References / See Also
- DEF SEG
- PEEK
- POKE
- BPEEK
- BPOKE
- BANK

7. Historical Context
Historically, 8-bit and 16-bit systems (like the IBM PC with GW-BASIC) had strict physical memory constraints (e.g., the 640K barrier or expanded/extended memory paging systems like EMS/XMS). The RAMBANK feature provides a modern, infinitely safer virtual equivalent that respects legacy PEEK/POKE behavior by mapping these virtual addresses back into dynamic safe allocations.

8. Manual Testing Guide
1. Launch the console interpreter with a custom bank size: basicpp-console.exe --init-rambanks 1000 (Windows) or ./baspp-console --init-rambanks 1000 (Linux).
2. Within the interpreter, execute DEF SEG to target high memory, and issue POKE commands.
3. Exit the interpreter. It should shut down cleanly without exit codes or segmentation faults.
4. Run without the flag to test the 64-bank default initialization.

9. Memory Management & Garbage Collection Profile
Under the hood, this keyword operates within the strict bounds of the BASIC++ deterministic memory manager (core/memory.c). When executed, any intermediate strings generated by this operation are routed to the Transient Memory Arena within the String Pool (core/stringpool.c). If the arena exceeds its high-water mark, an aggressive mark-and-sweep garbage collection pass is immediately triggered before the instruction completes. On embedded architectures (compiled with -DBPPLITEBUILD), this transient arena is statically clamped (default 4KB), meaning iterative loops invoking this keyword must be designed carefully to avoid ERROUTOF_MEMORY traps. Developers porting to bare-metal systems must verify that the memory.c heap allocator correctly points to a continuous SRAM block without fragmentation.

10. Portability & Hardware Porting Concerns
Because BASIC++ is strictly C17 ISO/IEC 9899:2018 compliant, this keyword relies on zero proprietary OS APIs. When compiling for headless microcontrollers (such as the Arduino Mega or ESP32) using the -DNOSDL2 macro, this instruction routes all its graphical or I/O side effects through the Platform Abstraction Layer (PAL). Hardware implementers must ensure that platformsleep() and platformgetticks() are properly mapped in core/platform.c if this keyword involves timing, yielding, or hardware-level interrupts. In cases where the underlying hardware lacks a floating-point unit (FPU), the lexer automatically maps numeric outputs to 32-bit fixed integer types if -DBPPNOFLOAT is enforced.

11. Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) Life Cycle
During the parsing phase, the Recursive Descent Parser encounters the token associated with this keyword. It allocates an ASTNode structure from the ASTARENA and populates its operand pointers. At runtime, the astinterpreter.c engine performs a post-order traversal to evaluate all child expression nodes before triggering the final execution hook. This two-pass system guarantees that syntax errors (like mismatched parentheses or missing commas) are caught globally before any destructive side-effects occur. Once parsed, the ASTNode resides in memory until NEW or RUN is executed, at which point the entire arena is zeroed out to prevent memory leaks.

12. C17 Standard Safety & Security Boundaries
Security and isolation are paramount. This keyword utilizes strict bounds-checking to prevent buffer overflows. Internally, any array indexing or string manipulation defaults to sizet for addressing, preventing negative index wraps. Stack-smashing protections are enforced virtually by the MAXCALL_STACK limit defined in config.h. Any attempt by this keyword to access unallocated heap memory will trigger the interpreter's internal fault handler, raising a trappable BASIC error rather than causing a segmentation fault at the OS level.

13. Deterministic Execution & Regression Prevention
To prevent regressions across builds (Windows, Linux, or MCU), the execution of this keyword is entirely deterministic. It behaves identically regardless of the endianness of the host CPU (Little-Endian x64 vs Big-Endian legacy chips). The testing suite in selftests_all.c ensures that the byte-for-byte output of this operation remains identical. If a developer modifies the underlying C source code for this keyword, they MUST run the SELFTEST suite to verify that parsing precedence, token mapping, and garbage collection behavior have not drifted.

14. Performance Profiling & Optimization Rules
For developers writing performance-critical algorithms in BASIC++, be aware that calling this keyword inside a FOR...NEXT or WHILE...WEND loop incurs a minimal virtual dispatch overhead. Because the interpreter uses a switch-case dispatch engine in exec.c, the branch predictor on modern CPUs will optimize repeated calls. However, on 8-bit or 16-bit chips, minimizing the use of string-mutating variants of this keyword will drastically improve frame rates and execution speed.