GOTO

1. Syntax & Parameters
GOTO <line_number | label>

*   line_number: An integer literal representing a valid, existing line number in the current program.
*   label: An alphanumeric label (which must be defined elsewhere in the code with a trailing colon, e.g., MyLabel:).

2. Description & Usage
The GOTO command instructs the BASIC++ interpreter to unconditionally branch execution to a specified line number or label. Unlike GOSUB, GOTO does not record a return address on the call stack. It simply updates the interpreter's Program Counter (PC) and resumes execution from the new location.

Usage:
In classic BASIC, GOTO was heavily relied upon for creating loops, jumping over subroutines, and error handling. While modern structured programming discourages excessive use of GOTO in favor of WHILE...WEND, FOR...NEXT, and block IF...THEN...ELSE, it remains a foundational control flow statement required for compatibility and highly optimized state machines.

Edge Cases & Boundary Conditions:
*   Missing Target: If the target linenumber or label does not exist, an ERRUNDEFINEDLINE or ERRUNDEFINED_LABEL is thrown either during pre-execution AST resolution or at runtime, depending on the execution mode (immediate vs. deferred).
*   Infinite Loops: 10 GOTO 10 is the quintessential infinite loop. The interpreter will continuously branch to the same line. BASIC++ safeguards against UI freezing by yielding to the event loop on each branch instruction, allowing CTRL+C or ESC to interrupt it.
*   Jumping into Blocks: Branching directly into the middle of a FOR...NEXT loop or WHILE...WEND block is technically possible but bypasses the loop's initialization. When the corresponding NEXT or WEND is hit, it will likely result in an ERRNEXTWITHOUTFOR or ERRWENDWITHOUTWHILE.

3. Code Examples

Standard GOTO with Line Numbers:
`basic
10 PRINT "Start"
20 GOTO 40
30 PRINT "This is skipped."
40 PRINT "End"
`

GOTO with Labels:
`basic
PRINT "Enter a number greater than 10:"
InputLoop:
  INPUT X
  IF X <= 10 THEN 
    PRINT "Too small, try again."
    GOTO InputLoop
  END IF
PRINT "Valid input: "; X
`

Simulating a Loop (Classic Style):
`basic
10 I = 1
20 IF I > 5 THEN GOTO 50
30 PRINT I
40 I = I + 1 : GOTO 20
50 END
`

4. Internal C-Source Mapping
*   source/parser/parser_branch.c
*   source/virtual/vm_branch.c

5. Implementation Details
The GOTO instruction is identified in the Lexer by the KW_GOTO token.

Parser Expectations:
The parser expects a single argument resolving to an integer literal or a string literal representing a label. This target is mapped and linked into the AST during the parsing phase. The parser guarantees that the argument exists syntactically but defers target validation to the AST linker or runtime depending on whether it's executing in direct mode or run mode.

Struct Mutations:
*   vm->pc (Program Counter): Mutated to point to the resolved target line or label. 

Execution Paths & Error Handling:
1. Check the target operand.
2. If it's a line number or label, consult the internal linemap or labelmap hash table.
3. If the target is found, update vm->pc to the corresponding AST node.
4. If not found, throw ERRUNDEFINEDLINE.
5. Trigger a VM yield check (vmyieldif_needed()) to process background events and prevent OS lockups on tight loops.

What to do if it breaks:
If GOTO jumps to the wrong line, verify that the linemap indexing is correct in vmbranch.c. Ensure that block statements (like IF...THEN...ELSE) are computing their internal jump offsets correctly, as they sometimes share the underlying jump mechanics with explicit GOTO statements.

6. Cross-References / See Also
*   ON...GOTO
*   GOSUB

7. Historical Context
GOTO is infamous as the source of "spaghetti code." Edsger W. Dijkstra famously published "Go To Statement Considered Harmful" in 1968. However, in early microcomputer dialects like GW-BASIC, it was mandatory due to the absence of modern control structures. BASIC++ provides GOTO for 100% ECMA-116 and GW-BASIC compliance while encouraging the use of structured alternatives.

8. Manual Testing Guide
1. Launch basicpp-console.exe (Windows) or baspp-console (Linux).
2. To test standard branching, type:
   `
   10 PRINT "A"
   20 GOTO 40
   30 PRINT "B"
   40 PRINT "C"
   `
   Type RUN. Output must be A then C. B must not print.
3. To test undefined line error, type:
   `
   10 GOTO 100
   `
   Type RUN. Ensure it throws ERRUNDEFINEDLINE.
4. To test infinite loop interruption, type:
   `
   10 GOTO 10
   `
   Type RUN. Press CTRL+C and ensure the interpreter halts cleanly and returns to the prompt.

9. Memory Management & Garbage Collection Profile
Under the hood, this keyword operates within the strict bounds of the BASIC++ deterministic memory manager (core/memory.c). When executed, any intermediate strings generated by this operation are routed to the Transient Memory Arena within the String Pool (core/stringpool.c). If the arena exceeds its high-water mark, an aggressive mark-and-sweep garbage collection pass is immediately triggered before the instruction completes. On embedded architectures (compiled with -DBPPLITEBUILD), this transient arena is statically clamped (default 4KB), meaning iterative loops invoking this keyword must be designed carefully to avoid ERROUTOF_MEMORY traps. Developers porting to bare-metal systems must verify that the memory.c heap allocator correctly points to a continuous SRAM block without fragmentation.

10. Portability & Hardware Porting Concerns
Because BASIC++ is strictly C17 ISO/IEC 9899:2018 compliant, this keyword relies on zero proprietary OS APIs. When compiling for headless microcontrollers (such as the Arduino Mega or ESP32) using the -DNOSDL2 macro, this instruction routes all its graphical or I/O side effects through the Platform Abstraction Layer (PAL). Hardware implementers must ensure that platformsleep() and platformgetticks() are properly mapped in core/platform.c if this keyword involves timing, yielding, or hardware-level interrupts. In cases where the underlying hardware lacks a floating-point unit (FPU), the lexer automatically maps numeric outputs to 32-bit fixed integer types if -DBPPNOFLOAT is enforced.

11. Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) Life Cycle
During the parsing phase, the Recursive Descent Parser encounters the token associated with this keyword. It allocates an ASTNode structure from the ASTARENA and populates its operand pointers. At runtime, the astinterpreter.c engine performs a post-order traversal to evaluate all child expression nodes before triggering the final execution hook. This two-pass system guarantees that syntax errors (like mismatched parentheses or missing commas) are caught globally before any destructive side-effects occur. Once parsed, the ASTNode resides in memory until NEW or RUN is executed, at which point the entire arena is zeroed out to prevent memory leaks.

12. C17 Standard Safety & Security Boundaries
Security and isolation are paramount. This keyword utilizes strict bounds-checking to prevent buffer overflows. Internally, any array indexing or string manipulation defaults to sizet for addressing, preventing negative index wraps. Stack-smashing protections are enforced virtually by the MAXCALL_STACK limit defined in config.h. Any attempt by this keyword to access unallocated heap memory will trigger the interpreter's internal fault handler, raising a trappable BASIC error rather than causing a segmentation fault at the OS level.

13. Deterministic Execution & Regression Prevention
To prevent regressions across builds (Windows, Linux, or MCU), the execution of this keyword is entirely deterministic. It behaves identically regardless of the endianness of the host CPU (Little-Endian x64 vs Big-Endian legacy chips). The testing suite in selftests_all.c ensures that the byte-for-byte output of this operation remains identical. If a developer modifies the underlying C source code for this keyword, they MUST run the SELFTEST suite to verify that parsing precedence, token mapping, and garbage collection behavior have not drifted.

14. Performance Profiling & Optimization Rules
For developers writing performance-critical algorithms in BASIC++, be aware that calling this keyword inside a FOR...NEXT or WHILE...WEND loop incurs a minimal virtual dispatch overhead. Because the interpreter uses a switch-case dispatch engine in exec.c, the branch predictor on modern CPUs will optimize repeated calls. However, on 8-bit or 16-bit chips, minimizing the use of string-mutating variants of this keyword will drastically improve frame rates and execution speed.