ERL

1. Syntax & Parameters
ERL
- No parameters. ERL is invoked as a read-only system variable containing an integer value.

2. Description & Usage
The ERL (Error Line) system variable returns the integer line number where the last runtime error occurred. It is a critical component of classic error handling, typically leveraged within an ON ERROR GOTO trap routine to pinpoint the exact location of the failure. This granular visibility allows the program to conditionally recover, branch to specific remediation logic, or report the precise point of failure to the user.

If an error is triggered in direct (immediate) mode, or if a program has not encountered any errors during its execution cycle, ERL evaluates to 0. Furthermore, ERL is read-only; attempts to assign a value to it (e.g., LET ERL = 100) will result in a Syntax Error. ERL works symbiotically with the ERR system variable, which holds the corresponding error code.

3. Code Examples
`basic
10 ON ERROR GOTO 1000
20 PRINT "Attempting division by zero..."
30 X = 10 / 0
40 PRINT "This line will not execute."
50 END

1000 REM --- Error Handler ---
1010 PRINT "A critical error occurred!"
1020 PRINT "Error Code (ERR): "; ERR
1030 PRINT "Error Line (ERL): "; ERL
1040 IF ERL = 30 THEN PRINT "Division by zero detected on line 30."
1050 RESUME NEXT
`

4. Internal C-Source Mapping
- source/core/eval.c: Evaluates TOKERL during expression parsing and pushes the state->lasterror_line to the evaluation stack.
- source/runtime/exec.c: Intercepts thrown exceptions and commits the current execution line to lasterrorline.
- source/parser/parserexpr.c: Handles the parsing logic for KWERL.
- source/lexer/lexer.c: Contains the lexical definition mapping the string "ERL" to KW_ERL.

5. Implementation Details
The BASIC++ interpreter persistently tracks the currently executing line number within the active runtime state (state->lasterrorline or rt->lasterrline). When a runtime error exception is raised (e.g., via errorraise), the execution loop intercepts the failure before branching to the registered error trap routine. During this interception, the current line number is captured and finalized into the lasterror_line state struct. 

When the expression evaluator encounters the ERL system variable, it directly queries this state struct and pushes the stored 16-bit or 32-bit integer onto the evaluation stack as a TYPE_INTEGER. Because the evaluator yields a literal integer evaluation for ERL, the AST parser explicitly forbids mutations against it.

If ERL breaks or fails to yield the correct line number, verify that exec.c is correctly snapshotting the line number prior to the stack unwind triggered by the error state. If ERL is returning 0 unexpectedly, verify that the error wasn't triggered in a zero-line context (like direct mode).

6. Cross-References / See Also
- ERR
- ERR$
- ON ERROR GOTO
- RESUME
- ERROR

7. Historical Context
In historic interpreters such as GW-BASIC and QBASIC, ERL returned the closest preceding line number. If a program was written entirely without line numbers (as was common in QBASIC), ERL was notoriously unreliable and often returned 0 or an unrelated line. In BASIC++, ERL has been engineered to strictly return the exact executing line number of the failure, ensuring complete ECMA-116 and Microsoft compatibility while operating safely within modern 64-bit architectures.

8. Manual Testing Guide
To manually verify the integrity of the ERL keyword:
1. Open the console via basicpp-console.exe (Windows) or ./baspp-console (Linux).
2. Enter the following test program:
   `basic
   10 ON ERROR GOTO 100
   20 ERROR 11
   30 END
   100 PRINT "Error on line: "; ERL
   110 RESUME NEXT
   `
3. Type RUN and press Enter.
4. The console must output: Error on line:  20.
5. This confirms that the ERROR statement successfully mutated the internal lasterrorline state, and the ERL variable successfully retrieved it.

9. Memory Management & Garbage Collection Profile
Under the hood, this keyword operates within the strict bounds of the BASIC++ deterministic memory manager (core/memory.c). When executed, any intermediate strings generated by this operation are routed to the Transient Memory Arena within the String Pool (core/stringpool.c). If the arena exceeds its high-water mark, an aggressive mark-and-sweep garbage collection pass is immediately triggered before the instruction completes. On embedded architectures (compiled with -DBPPLITEBUILD), this transient arena is statically clamped (default 4KB), meaning iterative loops invoking this keyword must be designed carefully to avoid ERROUTOF_MEMORY traps. Developers porting to bare-metal systems must verify that the memory.c heap allocator correctly points to a continuous SRAM block without fragmentation.

10. Portability & Hardware Porting Concerns
Because BASIC++ is strictly C17 ISO/IEC 9899:2018 compliant, this keyword relies on zero proprietary OS APIs. When compiling for headless microcontrollers (such as the Arduino Mega or ESP32) using the -DNOSDL2 macro, this instruction routes all its graphical or I/O side effects through the Platform Abstraction Layer (PAL). Hardware implementers must ensure that platformsleep() and platformgetticks() are properly mapped in core/platform.c if this keyword involves timing, yielding, or hardware-level interrupts. In cases where the underlying hardware lacks a floating-point unit (FPU), the lexer automatically maps numeric outputs to 32-bit fixed integer types if -DBPPNOFLOAT is enforced.

11. Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) Life Cycle
During the parsing phase, the Recursive Descent Parser encounters the token associated with this keyword. It allocates an ASTNode structure from the ASTARENA and populates its operand pointers. At runtime, the astinterpreter.c engine performs a post-order traversal to evaluate all child expression nodes before triggering the final execution hook. This two-pass system guarantees that syntax errors (like mismatched parentheses or missing commas) are caught globally before any destructive side-effects occur. Once parsed, the ASTNode resides in memory until NEW or RUN is executed, at which point the entire arena is zeroed out to prevent memory leaks.

12. C17 Standard Safety & Security Boundaries
Security and isolation are paramount. This keyword utilizes strict bounds-checking to prevent buffer overflows. Internally, any array indexing or string manipulation defaults to sizet for addressing, preventing negative index wraps. Stack-smashing protections are enforced virtually by the MAXCALL_STACK limit defined in config.h. Any attempt by this keyword to access unallocated heap memory will trigger the interpreter's internal fault handler, raising a trappable BASIC error rather than causing a segmentation fault at the OS level.

13. Deterministic Execution & Regression Prevention
To prevent regressions across builds (Windows, Linux, or MCU), the execution of this keyword is entirely deterministic. It behaves identically regardless of the endianness of the host CPU (Little-Endian x64 vs Big-Endian legacy chips). The testing suite in selftests_all.c ensures that the byte-for-byte output of this operation remains identical. If a developer modifies the underlying C source code for this keyword, they MUST run the SELFTEST suite to verify that parsing precedence, token mapping, and garbage collection behavior have not drifted.

14. Performance Profiling & Optimization Rules
For developers writing performance-critical algorithms in BASIC++, be aware that calling this keyword inside a FOR...NEXT or WHILE...WEND loop incurs a minimal virtual dispatch overhead. Because the interpreter uses a switch-case dispatch engine in exec.c, the branch predictor on modern CPUs will optimize repeated calls. However, on 8-bit or 16-bit chips, minimizing the use of string-mutating variants of this keyword will drastically improve frame rates and execution speed.