ERR$

1. Syntax & Parameters
msg$ = ERR$
- No parameters.

2. Description & Usage
Returns the system-level error message string corresponding to the last error encountered. While ERR returns the numeric error code, ERR$ provides the explicit human-readable description of that error. It is essential for modern logging, debugging, and dynamic error output where relying on a manual lookup table is insufficient.

3. Code Examples
`basic
10 ON ERROR GOTO 100
20 OPEN "I", 1, "NONEXISTENT.TXT"
30 END
100 PRINT "Error occurred: "; ERR$
110 RESUME NEXT
`

4. Internal C-Source Mapping
- Function: stdlibcoreerrstr in source/core/stdlibcore.c
- Registration: builtins.c under KWERRSTR

5. Implementation Details
The function accesses the global runtime error state (rt->err_code) and queries the error registry to retrieve the string description associated with the current ERR value.
Edge Cases & Boundary Conditions:
- If no error has occurred since the program started (i.e., ERR is 0), ERR$ safely returns a default string "Uncategorized Error" or an empty string, rather than referencing a null pointer.
- The string returned is deeply allocated inside the temporary string pool, ensuring it does not overwrite the global immutable error registry map in error_db.c.
- Troubleshooting: If ERR$ triggers an OUT OF MEMORY error in rare scenarios, the garbage collector may have failed to free previous string pool objects. This usually means your error trap loop is recursively generating strings without returning control flow to clear the transient scratch pool.

6. Cross-References / See Also
- ERR, ERL, ERROR, ON ERROR GOTO

7. Historical Context
In traditional GW-BASIC, programmers had to refer to the printed manual for error code meanings. ERR$ is a modern addition in BASIC++ that allows dynamic string representation of error codes, bringing the language closer to modern exception-handling conventions.

8. Manual Testing Guide
Interactive Test:
1. Launch basicpp-console.exe.
2. Type ERROR 53: PRINT ERR$ and verify it prints "File not found" or the exact system equivalent message.

Scripted Test (.BAS):
`basic
10 ON ERROR GOTO 100
20 ERROR 11
30 END
100 PRINT "CAUGHT ERROR: "; ERR$
110 IF ERR$ = "Division by zero" THEN PRINT "SUCCESS!"
120 RESUME NEXT
`

9. Memory Management & Garbage Collection Profile
Under the hood, this keyword operates within the strict bounds of the BASIC++ deterministic memory manager (core/memory.c). When executed, any intermediate strings generated by this operation are routed to the Transient Memory Arena within the String Pool (core/stringpool.c). If the arena exceeds its high-water mark, an aggressive mark-and-sweep garbage collection pass is immediately triggered before the instruction completes. On embedded architectures (compiled with -DBPPLITEBUILD), this transient arena is statically clamped (default 4KB), meaning iterative loops invoking this keyword must be designed carefully to avoid ERROUTOF_MEMORY traps. Developers porting to bare-metal systems must verify that the memory.c heap allocator correctly points to a continuous SRAM block without fragmentation.

10. Portability & Hardware Porting Concerns
Because BASIC++ is strictly C17 ISO/IEC 9899:2018 compliant, this keyword relies on zero proprietary OS APIs. When compiling for headless microcontrollers (such as the Arduino Mega or ESP32) using the -DNOSDL2 macro, this instruction routes all its graphical or I/O side effects through the Platform Abstraction Layer (PAL). Hardware implementers must ensure that platformsleep() and platformgetticks() are properly mapped in core/platform.c if this keyword involves timing, yielding, or hardware-level interrupts. In cases where the underlying hardware lacks a floating-point unit (FPU), the lexer automatically maps numeric outputs to 32-bit fixed integer types if -DBPPNOFLOAT is enforced.

11. Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) Life Cycle
During the parsing phase, the Recursive Descent Parser encounters the token associated with this keyword. It allocates an ASTNode structure from the ASTARENA and populates its operand pointers. At runtime, the astinterpreter.c engine performs a post-order traversal to evaluate all child expression nodes before triggering the final execution hook. This two-pass system guarantees that syntax errors (like mismatched parentheses or missing commas) are caught globally before any destructive side-effects occur. Once parsed, the ASTNode resides in memory until NEW or RUN is executed, at which point the entire arena is zeroed out to prevent memory leaks.

12. C17 Standard Safety & Security Boundaries
Security and isolation are paramount. This keyword utilizes strict bounds-checking to prevent buffer overflows. Internally, any array indexing or string manipulation defaults to sizet for addressing, preventing negative index wraps. Stack-smashing protections are enforced virtually by the MAXCALL_STACK limit defined in config.h. Any attempt by this keyword to access unallocated heap memory will trigger the interpreter's internal fault handler, raising a trappable BASIC error rather than causing a segmentation fault at the OS level.

13. Deterministic Execution & Regression Prevention
To prevent regressions across builds (Windows, Linux, or MCU), the execution of this keyword is entirely deterministic. It behaves identically regardless of the endianness of the host CPU (Little-Endian x64 vs Big-Endian legacy chips). The testing suite in selftests_all.c ensures that the byte-for-byte output of this operation remains identical. If a developer modifies the underlying C source code for this keyword, they MUST run the SELFTEST suite to verify that parsing precedence, token mapping, and garbage collection behavior have not drifted.

14. Performance Profiling & Optimization Rules
For developers writing performance-critical algorithms in BASIC++, be aware that calling this keyword inside a FOR...NEXT or WHILE...WEND loop incurs a minimal virtual dispatch overhead. Because the interpreter uses a switch-case dispatch engine in exec.c, the branch predictor on modern CPUs will optimize repeated calls. However, on 8-bit or 16-bit chips, minimizing the use of string-mutating variants of this keyword will drastically improve frame rates and execution speed.