ERROR

1. Syntax & Parameters
ERROR <error_code>

*   error_code: An integer expression representing the error code to be triggered. Standard error codes match classic GW-BASIC (e.g., 5 for Illegal Function Call, 11 for Division by Zero), but users can specify custom values.

2. Description & Usage
The ERROR statement forcefully simulates a runtime exception or triggers a user-defined error condition. When executed, it behaves exactly as if a built-in system error had occurred, populating the ERR and ERL variables and branching execution to the active error handler (if one exists).

Usage:
ERROR is primarily used for testing error-handling routines (by simulating standard errors) or for throwing custom domain-specific errors in large applications. If an ON ERROR GOTO handler is active, execution branches to it. If no handler is active, the program halts and prints the standard error message (or "Uncatchable error" for unknown codes) to the console.

Edge Cases & Boundary Conditions:
*   Out of Bounds Error Codes: Passing very large integers or negative integers might result in unexpected behavior or map to internal system exceptions. BASIC++ should cleanly handle or constrain these.
*   No Active Handler: Triggering ERROR without an ON ERROR GOTO handler will immediately terminate the running program.
*   Floating-Point Error Codes: If error_code evaluates to a float, it is typically truncated or rounded to an integer before being thrown.

3. Code Examples

Simulating a System Error:
`basic
10 ON ERROR GOTO 50
20 PRINT "Simulating division by zero..."
30 ERROR 11
40 END
50 PRINT "Caught error: "; ERR; " on line "; ERL
60 RESUME NEXT
`

Throwing a Custom Error:
`basic
10 ON ERROR GOTO ErrorHandler
20 INPUT "Enter a positive number: ", N
30 IF N < 0 THEN ERROR 200
40 PRINT "You entered: "; N
50 END
ErrorHandler:
60 IF ERR = 200 THEN PRINT "Custom error: Value must be positive!"
70 RESUME 20
`

4. Internal C-Source Mapping
*   source/parser/parser_statements.c
*   source/virtual/vm_error.c

5. Implementation Details
The ERROR instruction is parsed by the Lexer as KW_ERROR.

Parser Expectations:
The parser expects a single argument resolving to a numeric expression following the ERROR keyword. This is validated during the AST generation phase.

Struct Mutations:
*   vm->errorcode: Set to the evaluated value of errorcode.
*   vm->error_line: Set to the current line number where ERROR was executed.
*   vm->pc (Program Counter): Modified to point to the error handler target if one is active, otherwise the execution halts.

Execution Paths & Error Handling:
1. Evaluate the error_code expression. Convert it to a strict integer.
2. Call vmthrowerror(vm, evaluated_code).
3. The VM checks if vm->onerrortarget is set.
4. If set, it updates vm->pc and sets the vm->inerrorhandler flag.
5. If not set, it prints the error to the console, performs resource cleanup, and halts the VM back to the prompt.

What to do if it breaks:
If ERROR causes a segfault, check vmthrowerror for safe handling of arbitrary integers, ensuring array-out-of-bounds does not occur when mapping the error code to a built-in string message. Ensure vmthrowerror properly handles floating-point casting constraints.

6. Cross-References / See Also
*   ERL
*   ERR
*   ON ERROR GOTO
*   RESUME

7. Historical Context
In GW-BASIC, ERROR was the definitive way to test ON ERROR handlers or create software-based interrupts in business logic. BASIC++ retains full compatibility with this behavior, allowing script authors to define robust, domain-specific error state machines.

8. Manual Testing Guide
1. Launch basicpp-console.exe (Windows) or baspp-console (Linux).
2. To test throwing an error without a handler, type:
   10 ERROR 11
   Type RUN. Ensure the console prints a "Division by zero" error and halts.
3. To test with a handler, type:
   10 ON ERROR GOTO 40
   20 ERROR 255
   30 END
   40 PRINT ERR
   50 RESUME NEXT
   Type RUN. Output must be 255 followed by a clean program exit.

9. Memory Management & Garbage Collection Profile
Under the hood, this keyword operates within the strict bounds of the BASIC++ deterministic memory manager (core/memory.c). When executed, any intermediate strings generated by this operation are routed to the Transient Memory Arena within the String Pool (core/stringpool.c). If the arena exceeds its high-water mark, an aggressive mark-and-sweep garbage collection pass is immediately triggered before the instruction completes. On embedded architectures (compiled with -DBPPLITEBUILD), this transient arena is statically clamped (default 4KB), meaning iterative loops invoking this keyword must be designed carefully to avoid ERROUTOF_MEMORY traps. Developers porting to bare-metal systems must verify that the memory.c heap allocator correctly points to a continuous SRAM block without fragmentation.

10. Portability & Hardware Porting Concerns
Because BASIC++ is strictly C17 ISO/IEC 9899:2018 compliant, this keyword relies on zero proprietary OS APIs. When compiling for headless microcontrollers (such as the Arduino Mega or ESP32) using the -DNOSDL2 macro, this instruction routes all its graphical or I/O side effects through the Platform Abstraction Layer (PAL). Hardware implementers must ensure that platformsleep() and platformgetticks() are properly mapped in core/platform.c if this keyword involves timing, yielding, or hardware-level interrupts. In cases where the underlying hardware lacks a floating-point unit (FPU), the lexer automatically maps numeric outputs to 32-bit fixed integer types if -DBPPNOFLOAT is enforced.

11. Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) Life Cycle
During the parsing phase, the Recursive Descent Parser encounters the token associated with this keyword. It allocates an ASTNode structure from the ASTARENA and populates its operand pointers. At runtime, the astinterpreter.c engine performs a post-order traversal to evaluate all child expression nodes before triggering the final execution hook. This two-pass system guarantees that syntax errors (like mismatched parentheses or missing commas) are caught globally before any destructive side-effects occur. Once parsed, the ASTNode resides in memory until NEW or RUN is executed, at which point the entire arena is zeroed out to prevent memory leaks.

12. C17 Standard Safety & Security Boundaries
Security and isolation are paramount. This keyword utilizes strict bounds-checking to prevent buffer overflows. Internally, any array indexing or string manipulation defaults to sizet for addressing, preventing negative index wraps. Stack-smashing protections are enforced virtually by the MAXCALL_STACK limit defined in config.h. Any attempt by this keyword to access unallocated heap memory will trigger the interpreter's internal fault handler, raising a trappable BASIC error rather than causing a segmentation fault at the OS level.

13. Deterministic Execution & Regression Prevention
To prevent regressions across builds (Windows, Linux, or MCU), the execution of this keyword is entirely deterministic. It behaves identically regardless of the endianness of the host CPU (Little-Endian x64 vs Big-Endian legacy chips). The testing suite in selftests_all.c ensures that the byte-for-byte output of this operation remains identical. If a developer modifies the underlying C source code for this keyword, they MUST run the SELFTEST suite to verify that parsing precedence, token mapping, and garbage collection behavior have not drifted.

14. Performance Profiling & Optimization Rules
For developers writing performance-critical algorithms in BASIC++, be aware that calling this keyword inside a FOR...NEXT or WHILE...WEND loop incurs a minimal virtual dispatch overhead. Because the interpreter uses a switch-case dispatch engine in exec.c, the branch predictor on modern CPUs will optimize repeated calls. However, on 8-bit or 16-bit chips, minimizing the use of string-mutating variants of this keyword will drastically improve frame rates and execution speed.