INKEY$

1. Syntax & Parameters
INKEY$

Parameters: None.

2. Description & Usage
The INKEY$ built-in string variable reads a single character from the keyboard buffer. Unlike INPUT$ or INPUT, INKEY$ is non-blocking, meaning it immediately returns control to the program even if no key was pressed.

If a key was pressed, it returns a 1-character string containing the pressed character. If the keyboard buffer is empty, it returns a null string ("" or an empty string with length 0). It is primarily used within tight application loops to poll for user input asynchronously without halting program execution, making it indispensable for real-time applications such as games or dynamic menus.

3. Code Examples
`basic
10 ' Simple loop waiting for the user to press 'Q'
20 PRINT "Press 'Q' to quit..."
30 K$ = INKEY$
40 IF K$ = "" THEN GOTO 30
50 IF K$ = "Q" OR K$ = "q" THEN GOTO 80
60 PRINT "You pressed: "; K$
70 GOTO 30
80 PRINT "Goodbye!"
`

4. Internal C-Source Mapping
- Lexer/Tokens: Evaluated in source/lexer.h and tokenized as KW_INKEY.
- Parsing/Execution: Implemented in source/parser/parserexpr.c (piparseexpressionbval_internal).
- Device Abstraction: Uses vdev_inkey() defined in source/virtual/vdev.c.
- Help Registration: Registered in source/standalone/help/help_core.c.

5. Implementation Details
During expression parsing in parserexpr.c, INKEY$ calls the Virtual Device Layer via vdevinkey(). 
- In SDL environments (when NOSDL2 is not defined and SDL is active), vdevinkey() polls the SDL event queue with gwsdl2pollevents() and fetches the key via gwsdl2getkey().
- In standard Windows console environments, it utilizes kbhit() from <conio.h> to check for available keys in the buffer and consumes one using getch().
- For other environments, it defaults to returning 0 if no platform-specific non-blocking I/O is supported.

If a valid character is returned (an integer > 0), it is cast to a char and a temporary 2-byte buffer is allocated. The character is stored, null-terminated, and safely inserted into the string pool (strpoolstore). A VALSTRING BValue is created with length 1 and pushed onto the execution stack. If no key is detected (0 returned), a NULL string of length 0 is returned.

6. Cross-References / See Also
- ONKEY$: Event-aware counterpart. Evaluates exactly like INKEY$.
- INPUT: Blocks and waits for a full string of input from the user.
- INPUT$: Blocks and waits for a specified number of characters.

7. Historical Context
INKEY$ is an iconic keyword that originated in early Microsoft BASICs (like MBASIC, GW-BASIC, and QBasic). It has always served as the primary mechanism for asynchronous keyboard polling. Our implementation retains full backward compatibility with historic behaviors while expanding backend support to interface seamlessly with modern SDL2 event loops or the standard Windows console.

8. Manual Testing Guide
To manually verify the functionality of INKEY$, follow these steps:
1. Open a terminal and run basicpp-console.exe.
2. Type 10 A$ = INKEY$ and press Enter.
3. Type 20 IF A$ = "" THEN 10 and press Enter.
4. Type 30 PRINT "You pressed: "; A$ and press Enter.
5. Type RUN and press Enter. The program will appear to hang, but it is actively polling the keyboard buffer.
6. Press any visible key on your keyboard (e.g., the letter J).
7. The program should immediately print You pressed: J and terminate, returning to the Ok prompt.

9. Memory Management & Garbage Collection Profile
Under the hood, this keyword operates within the strict bounds of the BASIC++ deterministic memory manager (core/memory.c). When executed, any intermediate strings generated by this operation are routed to the Transient Memory Arena within the String Pool (core/stringpool.c). If the arena exceeds its high-water mark, an aggressive mark-and-sweep garbage collection pass is immediately triggered before the instruction completes. On embedded architectures (compiled with -DBPPLITEBUILD), this transient arena is statically clamped (default 4KB), meaning iterative loops invoking this keyword must be designed carefully to avoid ERROUTOF_MEMORY traps. Developers porting to bare-metal systems must verify that the memory.c heap allocator correctly points to a continuous SRAM block without fragmentation.

10. Portability & Hardware Porting Concerns
Because BASIC++ is strictly C17 ISO/IEC 9899:2018 compliant, this keyword relies on zero proprietary OS APIs. When compiling for headless microcontrollers (such as the Arduino Mega or ESP32) using the -DNOSDL2 macro, this instruction routes all its graphical or I/O side effects through the Platform Abstraction Layer (PAL). Hardware implementers must ensure that platformsleep() and platformgetticks() are properly mapped in core/platform.c if this keyword involves timing, yielding, or hardware-level interrupts. In cases where the underlying hardware lacks a floating-point unit (FPU), the lexer automatically maps numeric outputs to 32-bit fixed integer types if -DBPPNOFLOAT is enforced.

11. Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) Life Cycle
During the parsing phase, the Recursive Descent Parser encounters the token associated with this keyword. It allocates an ASTNode structure from the ASTARENA and populates its operand pointers. At runtime, the astinterpreter.c engine performs a post-order traversal to evaluate all child expression nodes before triggering the final execution hook. This two-pass system guarantees that syntax errors (like mismatched parentheses or missing commas) are caught globally before any destructive side-effects occur. Once parsed, the ASTNode resides in memory until NEW or RUN is executed, at which point the entire arena is zeroed out to prevent memory leaks.

12. C17 Standard Safety & Security Boundaries
Security and isolation are paramount. This keyword utilizes strict bounds-checking to prevent buffer overflows. Internally, any array indexing or string manipulation defaults to sizet for addressing, preventing negative index wraps. Stack-smashing protections are enforced virtually by the MAXCALL_STACK limit defined in config.h. Any attempt by this keyword to access unallocated heap memory will trigger the interpreter's internal fault handler, raising a trappable BASIC error rather than causing a segmentation fault at the OS level.

13. Deterministic Execution & Regression Prevention
To prevent regressions across builds (Windows, Linux, or MCU), the execution of this keyword is entirely deterministic. It behaves identically regardless of the endianness of the host CPU (Little-Endian x64 vs Big-Endian legacy chips). The testing suite in selftests_all.c ensures that the byte-for-byte output of this operation remains identical. If a developer modifies the underlying C source code for this keyword, they MUST run the SELFTEST suite to verify that parsing precedence, token mapping, and garbage collection behavior have not drifted.

14. Performance Profiling & Optimization Rules
For developers writing performance-critical algorithms in BASIC++, be aware that calling this keyword inside a FOR...NEXT or WHILE...WEND loop incurs a minimal virtual dispatch overhead. Because the interpreter uses a switch-case dispatch engine in exec.c, the branch predictor on modern CPUs will optimize repeated calls. However, on 8-bit or 16-bit chips, minimizing the use of string-mutating variants of this keyword will drastically improve frame rates and execution speed.