ONKEY$

1. Syntax & Parameters
ONKEY$

Parameters: None.

2. Description & Usage
The ONKEY$ built-in string variable functions as an event-aware counterpart to INKEY$. It reads a single character from the keyboard buffer in a non-blocking manner, returning immediately to the caller. 

Just like INKEY$, if a key has been pressed, it returns a 1-character string containing the corresponding character. If no key has been pressed, it returns a null string (""). The inclusion of this keyword is primarily for symmetry with event-driven paradigms (ON KEY) and operates exactly the same as INKEY$ during standard expression evaluation.

3. Code Examples
`basic
10 ' Wait for any key using ONKEY$
20 PRINT "Waiting for a key press..."
30 K$ = ONKEY$
40 IF K$ = "" THEN GOTO 30
50 PRINT "You pressed: "; K$
`

4. Internal C-Source Mapping
- Lexer/Tokens: Evaluated in source/lexer.h and tokenized as KW_ONKEY.
- Parsing/Execution: Implemented alongside INKEY$ in source/parser/parserexpr.c (piparseexpressionbval_internal).
- Device Abstraction: Leverages the exact same vdev_inkey() routine from source/virtual/vdev.c.
- Help Registration: Registered in source/standalone/help/help_core.c.

5. Implementation Details
During the parsing of expressions in parserexpr.c, the execution path for KWONKEY is logically unified with KWINKEY. Both tokens trigger a call to the Virtual Device Layer's keyboard polling function, vdevinkey().

vdevinkey() retrieves the next character from the keyboard buffer without blocking execution. In SDL GUI modes, this reads from the SDL event queue (gwsdl2getkey()); in standard text modes, it leverages kbhit() and getch() on Windows, or returns 0 if unsupported on a specific platform.

If a valid character is read (an integer > 0), it is processed into a 1-character C string, which is then dynamically stored into the memory-safe string pool via strpool_store. A string BValue with length 1 is formulated and pushed onto the execution stack. Conversely, if no key was ready, a BValue representing a zero-length string (NULL) is generated and pushed.

6. Cross-References / See Also
- INKEY$: The standard non-blocking single-char keyboard read function.
- ON KEY: Used to define event-driven interrupt handling for specific keys.
- INPUT$: Blocking read for a specified number of characters.

7. Historical Context
Unlike INKEY$, which was universally standard across 8-bit and 16-bit Microsoft BASICs (including GW-BASIC and QBasic), ONKEY$ is an extended construct. While classic dialects used ON KEY(n) GOSUB for hardware interrupt-like keystroke detection, ONKEY$ acts as a functional string alias to INKEY$ inside standard expressions for systems bridging event-polling with continuous string retrieval.

8. Manual Testing Guide
To manually verify the functionality of ONKEY$, follow these steps:
1. Open your system terminal and execute basicpp-console.exe.
2. Input the following test program:
   10 A$ = ONKEY$
   20 IF A$ = "" THEN 10
   30 PRINT "You triggered ONKEY$ with: "; A$
3. Type RUN and press Enter. The interpreter will pause visually, polling the input buffer continuously.
4. Press a recognizable key on the keyboard (e.g., X).
5. The terminal should immediately output You triggered ONKEY$ with: X and complete execution, successfully demonstrating its non-blocking read operation.

9. Memory Management & Garbage Collection Profile
Under the hood, this keyword operates within the strict bounds of the BASIC++ deterministic memory manager (core/memory.c). When executed, any intermediate strings generated by this operation are routed to the Transient Memory Arena within the String Pool (core/stringpool.c). If the arena exceeds its high-water mark, an aggressive mark-and-sweep garbage collection pass is immediately triggered before the instruction completes. On embedded architectures (compiled with -DBPPLITEBUILD), this transient arena is statically clamped (default 4KB), meaning iterative loops invoking this keyword must be designed carefully to avoid ERROUTOF_MEMORY traps. Developers porting to bare-metal systems must verify that the memory.c heap allocator correctly points to a continuous SRAM block without fragmentation.

10. Portability & Hardware Porting Concerns
Because BASIC++ is strictly C17 ISO/IEC 9899:2018 compliant, this keyword relies on zero proprietary OS APIs. When compiling for headless microcontrollers (such as the Arduino Mega or ESP32) using the -DNOSDL2 macro, this instruction routes all its graphical or I/O side effects through the Platform Abstraction Layer (PAL). Hardware implementers must ensure that platformsleep() and platformgetticks() are properly mapped in core/platform.c if this keyword involves timing, yielding, or hardware-level interrupts. In cases where the underlying hardware lacks a floating-point unit (FPU), the lexer automatically maps numeric outputs to 32-bit fixed integer types if -DBPPNOFLOAT is enforced.

11. Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) Life Cycle
During the parsing phase, the Recursive Descent Parser encounters the token associated with this keyword. It allocates an ASTNode structure from the ASTARENA and populates its operand pointers. At runtime, the astinterpreter.c engine performs a post-order traversal to evaluate all child expression nodes before triggering the final execution hook. This two-pass system guarantees that syntax errors (like mismatched parentheses or missing commas) are caught globally before any destructive side-effects occur. Once parsed, the ASTNode resides in memory until NEW or RUN is executed, at which point the entire arena is zeroed out to prevent memory leaks.

12. C17 Standard Safety & Security Boundaries
Security and isolation are paramount. This keyword utilizes strict bounds-checking to prevent buffer overflows. Internally, any array indexing or string manipulation defaults to sizet for addressing, preventing negative index wraps. Stack-smashing protections are enforced virtually by the MAXCALL_STACK limit defined in config.h. Any attempt by this keyword to access unallocated heap memory will trigger the interpreter's internal fault handler, raising a trappable BASIC error rather than causing a segmentation fault at the OS level.

13. Deterministic Execution & Regression Prevention
To prevent regressions across builds (Windows, Linux, or MCU), the execution of this keyword is entirely deterministic. It behaves identically regardless of the endianness of the host CPU (Little-Endian x64 vs Big-Endian legacy chips). The testing suite in selftests_all.c ensures that the byte-for-byte output of this operation remains identical. If a developer modifies the underlying C source code for this keyword, they MUST run the SELFTEST suite to verify that parsing precedence, token mapping, and garbage collection behavior have not drifted.

14. Performance Profiling & Optimization Rules
For developers writing performance-critical algorithms in BASIC++, be aware that calling this keyword inside a FOR...NEXT or WHILE...WEND loop incurs a minimal virtual dispatch overhead. Because the interpreter uses a switch-case dispatch engine in exec.c, the branch predictor on modern CPUs will optimize repeated calls. However, on 8-bit or 16-bit chips, minimizing the use of string-mutating variants of this keyword will drastically improve frame rates and execution speed.