LIST

1. Syntax & Parameters

LIST [linerange] [, "searchstring"]

* line_range (Optional): Specifies the lines to list. Can be:
  * line_number: Lists a single line (e.g., LIST 10).
  * startline-: Lists from startline to the end of the program (e.g., LIST 100-).
  * -endline: Lists from the beginning to endline (e.g., LIST -100).
  * startline-endline: Lists an explicit range (e.g., LIST 10-100).
* search_string (Optional): A string literal filtering the output. Only lines containing this exact string will be printed. Case-sensitive substring match.

2. Description & Usage

The LIST command outputs the currently loaded BASIC++ AST (Abstract Syntax Tree) back into human-readable source code. Because BASIC++ tokenizes the code upon entry, the output of LIST is reconstructed from the internal p-code tokens. This normalization ensures keywords are capitalized and whitespace is consistent.

Edge Cases & Behavior Constraints:
* Empty Range: If the specified range contains no lines, LIST silently returns to the prompt without error.
* Overlapping/Reversed Range: If startline is greater than endline, LIST throws an ERR_SYNTAX or gracefully returns, depending on parser configuration.
* Search Filtering: When a search string is appended (e.g., LIST 10-100, "PRINT"), the interpreter performs a case-sensitive substring match on the detokenized representation of each line before printing it.
* Interruption: The user can abort a long LIST operation asynchronously by pressing Ctrl+C, which triggers the virtual console's break handler.
* Execution Context: LIST is generally executed in direct mode. If executed from within a running program, it will print the requested lines and execution will continue, potentially disrupting console layout.

3. Code Examples

Listing the entire program:
`basic
LIST
`

Listing a specific line:
`basic
LIST 100
`

Listing from the beginning up to line 50:
`basic
LIST -50
`

Listing from line 100 to the end:
`basic
LIST 100-
`

Listing a specific range of lines:
`basic
LIST 10-100
`

Filtering output by string content:
`basic
LIST 10-1000, "GOTO"
`

4. Internal C-Source Mapping

* Lexer/Parser: source/progmgmt/parsercmds.c (piparse_list()).
* Runtime Execution: source/codegen/detok.c (detokenizeline()), source/core/vmexec.c.
* Structs Involved: RuntimeState->ast_root, LineNode.

5. Implementation Details

When the LIST command is intercepted by the shell or parser (piparselist()), the system parses the optional range boundaries into startline and endline integers. If no boundaries are provided, startline defaults to 0 and endline defaults to UINT32_MAX.

During execution, the VM iterates through the linked list of LineNode structs anchored at rt->ast_root. For each node:
1. The line number is bounds-checked against the requested range.
2. If it falls within the range, the byte-code payload of the line is passed to detokenize_line().
3. The detokenizer recursively walks the bytecode, mapping OP_* tokens back to their string representations (from the keyword dictionary).
4. If a search string was provided, strstr() is executed on the resulting detokenized buffer.
5. If the line passes the filter, it is emitted to the virtual console buffer.

Execution Paths and Struct Mutations: 
The LIST command is generally a read-only operation regarding the AST. It traverses LineNode pointers but does not mutate them. It does mutate the state of the console buffer and UI state.

What can be changed: The detokenizer spacing logic can be altered to adjust how tightly operators are clustered.
What cannot be changed: The internal AST byte-code format must remain deterministic; any corruption in the LineNode payload will cause a segfault during the detokenization pass.
Troubleshooting: If LIST prints gibberish, the bytecode payload inside the AST has been corrupted, likely by a rogue POKE into the AST memory segment. If LIST freezes, the LineNode linked list might contain a circular reference.

6. Cross-References / See Also
* LLIST
* DELETE
* NEW

7. Historical Context
In original GW-BASIC, LIST dumped the raw memory buffer. In BASIC++, LIST reconstructs the source from the AST p-code, guaranteeing that the source is always clean and syntax-checked.

8. Manual Testing Guide

1. Open a terminal or command prompt.
2. Launch the interpreter directly by running basicpp-console.exe. Do not use the python testing script.
3. Type 10 PRINT "HELLO" and hit Enter.
4. Type 20 GOTO 10 and hit Enter.
5. Type LIST and hit Enter to verify the entire program is listed.
6. Type LIST 20 and hit Enter to verify only line 20 lists.
7. Type LIST 10-20, "PRINT" and hit Enter to verify the substring filter isolates line 10.

9. Memory Management & Garbage Collection Profile
Under the hood, this keyword operates within the strict bounds of the BASIC++ deterministic memory manager (core/memory.c). When executed, any intermediate strings generated by this operation are routed to the Transient Memory Arena within the String Pool (core/stringpool.c). If the arena exceeds its high-water mark, an aggressive mark-and-sweep garbage collection pass is immediately triggered before the instruction completes. On embedded architectures (compiled with -DBPPLITEBUILD), this transient arena is statically clamped (default 4KB), meaning iterative loops invoking this keyword must be designed carefully to avoid ERROUTOF_MEMORY traps. Developers porting to bare-metal systems must verify that the memory.c heap allocator correctly points to a continuous SRAM block without fragmentation.

10. Portability & Hardware Porting Concerns
Because BASIC++ is strictly C17 ISO/IEC 9899:2018 compliant, this keyword relies on zero proprietary OS APIs. When compiling for headless microcontrollers (such as the Arduino Mega or ESP32) using the -DNOSDL2 macro, this instruction routes all its graphical or I/O side effects through the Platform Abstraction Layer (PAL). Hardware implementers must ensure that platformsleep() and platformgetticks() are properly mapped in core/platform.c if this keyword involves timing, yielding, or hardware-level interrupts. In cases where the underlying hardware lacks a floating-point unit (FPU), the lexer automatically maps numeric outputs to 32-bit fixed integer types if -DBPPNOFLOAT is enforced.

11. Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) Life Cycle
During the parsing phase, the Recursive Descent Parser encounters the token associated with this keyword. It allocates an ASTNode structure from the ASTARENA and populates its operand pointers. At runtime, the astinterpreter.c engine performs a post-order traversal to evaluate all child expression nodes before triggering the final execution hook. This two-pass system guarantees that syntax errors (like mismatched parentheses or missing commas) are caught globally before any destructive side-effects occur. Once parsed, the ASTNode resides in memory until NEW or RUN is executed, at which point the entire arena is zeroed out to prevent memory leaks.

12. C17 Standard Safety & Security Boundaries
Security and isolation are paramount. This keyword utilizes strict bounds-checking to prevent buffer overflows. Internally, any array indexing or string manipulation defaults to sizet for addressing, preventing negative index wraps. Stack-smashing protections are enforced virtually by the MAXCALL_STACK limit defined in config.h. Any attempt by this keyword to access unallocated heap memory will trigger the interpreter's internal fault handler, raising a trappable BASIC error rather than causing a segmentation fault at the OS level.

13. Deterministic Execution & Regression Prevention
To prevent regressions across builds (Windows, Linux, or MCU), the execution of this keyword is entirely deterministic. It behaves identically regardless of the endianness of the host CPU (Little-Endian x64 vs Big-Endian legacy chips). The testing suite in selftests_all.c ensures that the byte-for-byte output of this operation remains identical. If a developer modifies the underlying C source code for this keyword, they MUST run the SELFTEST suite to verify that parsing precedence, token mapping, and garbage collection behavior have not drifted.

14. Performance Profiling & Optimization Rules
For developers writing performance-critical algorithms in BASIC++, be aware that calling this keyword inside a FOR...NEXT or WHILE...WEND loop incurs a minimal virtual dispatch overhead. Because the interpreter uses a switch-case dispatch engine in exec.c, the branch predictor on modern CPUs will optimize repeated calls. However, on 8-bit or 16-bit chips, minimizing the use of string-mutating variants of this keyword will drastically improve frame rates and execution speed.