PWD$

1. Syntax & Parameters
PWD$

Parameters: None.

2. Description & Usage
The PWD$ built-in string function returns the complete absolute path of the current working directory. Unlike CWD$, which returns only the final folder name, PWD$ provides the full directory hierarchy starting from the root of the filesystem or drive letter.

This function is essential when writing scripts that need to reference absolute file paths dynamically or for debugging file-based operations. 

3. Code Examples
`basic
10 ' Display the full current working directory
20 PRINT "The absolute path is: "; PWD$
30 ' Example of using it to construct a file path
40 FULL_PATH$ = PWD$ + "\data.txt"
50 PRINT "Looking for file at: "; FULL_PATH$
`

4. Internal C-Source Mapping
- Lexer/Tokens: Evaluated in source/lexer.h and tokenized as KW_PWD.
- Parsing/Execution: Implemented in source/parser/parserexpr.c (piparseexpressionbval_internal).
- Help Registration: Registered in source/standalone/help/help_core.c.

5. Implementation Details
During expression evaluation in parserexpr.c, PWD$ leverages the standard C library function getcwd (on Windows) or getcwd (on POSIX systems) to obtain the current absolute path of the executing process. 

The path is stored into a 512-byte temporary buffer (cwdbuf). The length of the retrieved string is computed, and the string is then securely allocated and copied into the interpreter's string pool via strpoolstore. Finally, a BValue of type VALSTRING pointing to the pooled string is pushed onto the evaluation stack. 

If the underlying OS call to getcwd fails (e.g., due to permission errors or path length exceeding the buffer, which is extremely rare for 512 bytes), the first character of the buffer is null-terminated, resulting in PWD$ safely returning an empty string without causing buffer overflows or crashes.

6. Cross-References / See Also
- CWD$: Returns only the current directory folder name, rather than the full path.
- CHDIR: Changes the current working directory.
- FILES: Lists the files in the current working directory.

7. Historical Context
In traditional GW-BASIC and QBasic environments, obtaining the current working directory directly into a string variable was not natively supported through a dedicated system variable keyword. Typically, users had to interface with DOS interrupts or write custom external routines to retrieve the path. PWD$ brings modern POSIX-like behavior natively into the BASIC++ ecosystem.

8. Manual Testing Guide
To manually verify the functionality of PWD$, follow these steps:
1. Open a terminal and navigate to the root of the BASIC++ source code.
2. Run basicpp-console.exe to start the interactive prompt.
3. Type PRINT PWD$ and press Enter. Verify that the output shows the full absolute path of the directory (e.g., C:\Users\rtdos\GitHub\basic-plus-plus).
4. Type CHDIR "tests" and press Enter to change the directory.
5. Type PRINT PWD$ again and ensure the path correctly reflects the new subdirectory (e.g., C:\Users\rtdos\GitHub\basic-plus-plus\tests).
6. Use CHDIR ".." to revert to the parent directory and verify using PRINT PWD$.

9. Memory Management & Garbage Collection Profile
Under the hood, this keyword operates within the strict bounds of the BASIC++ deterministic memory manager (core/memory.c). When executed, any intermediate strings generated by this operation are routed to the Transient Memory Arena within the String Pool (core/stringpool.c). If the arena exceeds its high-water mark, an aggressive mark-and-sweep garbage collection pass is immediately triggered before the instruction completes. On embedded architectures (compiled with -DBPPLITEBUILD), this transient arena is statically clamped (default 4KB), meaning iterative loops invoking this keyword must be designed carefully to avoid ERROUTOF_MEMORY traps. Developers porting to bare-metal systems must verify that the memory.c heap allocator correctly points to a continuous SRAM block without fragmentation.

10. Portability & Hardware Porting Concerns
Because BASIC++ is strictly C17 ISO/IEC 9899:2018 compliant, this keyword relies on zero proprietary OS APIs. When compiling for headless microcontrollers (such as the Arduino Mega or ESP32) using the -DNOSDL2 macro, this instruction routes all its graphical or I/O side effects through the Platform Abstraction Layer (PAL). Hardware implementers must ensure that platformsleep() and platformgetticks() are properly mapped in core/platform.c if this keyword involves timing, yielding, or hardware-level interrupts. In cases where the underlying hardware lacks a floating-point unit (FPU), the lexer automatically maps numeric outputs to 32-bit fixed integer types if -DBPPNOFLOAT is enforced.

11. Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) Life Cycle
During the parsing phase, the Recursive Descent Parser encounters the token associated with this keyword. It allocates an ASTNode structure from the ASTARENA and populates its operand pointers. At runtime, the astinterpreter.c engine performs a post-order traversal to evaluate all child expression nodes before triggering the final execution hook. This two-pass system guarantees that syntax errors (like mismatched parentheses or missing commas) are caught globally before any destructive side-effects occur. Once parsed, the ASTNode resides in memory until NEW or RUN is executed, at which point the entire arena is zeroed out to prevent memory leaks.

12. C17 Standard Safety & Security Boundaries
Security and isolation are paramount. This keyword utilizes strict bounds-checking to prevent buffer overflows. Internally, any array indexing or string manipulation defaults to sizet for addressing, preventing negative index wraps. Stack-smashing protections are enforced virtually by the MAXCALL_STACK limit defined in config.h. Any attempt by this keyword to access unallocated heap memory will trigger the interpreter's internal fault handler, raising a trappable BASIC error rather than causing a segmentation fault at the OS level.

13. Deterministic Execution & Regression Prevention
To prevent regressions across builds (Windows, Linux, or MCU), the execution of this keyword is entirely deterministic. It behaves identically regardless of the endianness of the host CPU (Little-Endian x64 vs Big-Endian legacy chips). The testing suite in selftests_all.c ensures that the byte-for-byte output of this operation remains identical. If a developer modifies the underlying C source code for this keyword, they MUST run the SELFTEST suite to verify that parsing precedence, token mapping, and garbage collection behavior have not drifted.

14. Performance Profiling & Optimization Rules
For developers writing performance-critical algorithms in BASIC++, be aware that calling this keyword inside a FOR...NEXT or WHILE...WEND loop incurs a minimal virtual dispatch overhead. Because the interpreter uses a switch-case dispatch engine in exec.c, the branch predictor on modern CPUs will optimize repeated calls. However, on 8-bit or 16-bit chips, minimizing the use of string-mutating variants of this keyword will drastically improve frame rates and execution speed.