SAVE

1. Syntax & Parameters
SAVE "filename" [, A | , P]

- "filename": A string expression or literal specifying the path and name of the file to save.
- A: (Optional) Saves the file in ASCII text format.
- P: (Optional) Saves the file in a protected (tokenized/binary) format.

2. Description & Usage
The SAVE keyword writes the current program residing in the interpreter's memory workspace to a file on the local disk. By default (if neither , A nor , P is specified), classic BASIC interpreters saved in a proprietary binary tokenized format. For BASIC++, the default behavior is to save as plain ASCII text unless compatibility settings force binary tokenization.

The , A flag forces the file to be saved as human-readable ASCII text.
The , P flag forces the file to be saved in a protected format, which prevents it from being LISTed or edited once loaded back into memory.

Edge Cases & Boundary Conditions:
- Overwrite Behavior: If a file with the identical name already exists in the target directory, SAVE will silently overwrite it without prompting for confirmation.
- Empty Workspace: If memory is empty (i.e., just a NEW command was issued), SAVE will create an empty 0-byte file (or a file with only an EOF marker/header).
- Invalid Paths: Attempting to save to a read-only directory, an invalid drive letter, or using illegal characters in the filename will result in a Bad file name or Path/File access error.
- String Evaluation: The filename can be a dynamic string variable, meaning SAVE F$ is valid.

3. Code Examples

Basic Save:
`basic
SAVE "MYPROG.BAS"
`
Expected Behavior: Saves the workspace to MYPROG.BAS.

Dynamic Filename:
`basic
10 F$ = "APP_V2.BAS"
20 SAVE F$, A
`
Expected Behavior: Evaluates the variable F$ and saves the program as ASCII to APP_V2.BAS.

4. Internal C-Source Mapping
- Lexer: source/parser/lexer.c (KW_SAVE)
- AST Node: source/parser/ast.c (STMT_SAVE)
- Runtime Execution: source/progmgmt/parserprogmgmt.c -> piparse_save()
- VFS Abstraction: source/platform/vfs.c

5. Implementation Details
The piparsesave() function evaluates the filename argument, ensuring it resolves to a valid VAL_STRING. It then calls the platform-agnostic file writing routine.

Execution Paths and Struct Mutations:
1. The interpreter locks the AST to ensure no modifications happen during the write traversal.
2. The Program_Lines linked list is iterated sequentially from the lowest line number to the highest.
3. For an ASCII save (, A), the detokenizer/unparser (asttostring()) is invoked on each line's AST node, converting the internal structs back into human-readable text strings, which are then written to the file descriptor.
4. For a protected save (, P), the program is serialized into a binary format, and an internal encryption or obfuscation flag is set in the header.

Troubleshooting and Constraints:
- What CAN be changed: The internal routine for ASCII detokenization can be updated to enforce specific casing (e.g., forcing all keywords to uppercase on save) or spacing.
- What CANNOT be changed: The , A and , P flags must remain functionally identical to legacy implementations. The file I/O must strictly use platform.c interfaces (never direct OS headers) to ensure BSD/Linux/Windows portability.
- If it breaks: If a program saves but cannot be loaded, inspect the detokenizer. Missing spaces around operators during the unparsing phase will create syntax errors upon reloading.

6. Cross-References / See Also
- LOAD
- NEW
- LIST

7. Historical Context
In GW-BASIC, .BAS files were tokenized binary by default to save disk space on 360K floppies, requiring SAVE "X", A to export to text. Because modern environments prioritize Git version control and readability, BASIC++ defaults to ASCII unless strictly configured otherwise.

8. Manual Testing Guide
1. Launch basicpp-console.exe.
2. Type: 10 A=1 : 20 PRINT A and press ENTER.
3. Type: SAVE "DUMP.BAS", A and press ENTER.
4. Exit the interpreter (SYSTEM).
5. Open DUMP.BAS in a standard text editor (like Notepad or cat on Linux).
6. Verify the file contains human-readable text: 10 A=1 : 20 PRINT A.

9. Memory Management & Garbage Collection Profile
Under the hood, this keyword operates within the strict bounds of the BASIC++ deterministic memory manager (core/memory.c). When executed, any intermediate strings generated by this operation are routed to the Transient Memory Arena within the String Pool (core/stringpool.c). If the arena exceeds its high-water mark, an aggressive mark-and-sweep garbage collection pass is immediately triggered before the instruction completes. On embedded architectures (compiled with -DBPPLITEBUILD), this transient arena is statically clamped (default 4KB), meaning iterative loops invoking this keyword must be designed carefully to avoid ERROUTOF_MEMORY traps. Developers porting to bare-metal systems must verify that the memory.c heap allocator correctly points to a continuous SRAM block without fragmentation.

10. Portability & Hardware Porting Concerns
Because BASIC++ is strictly C17 ISO/IEC 9899:2018 compliant, this keyword relies on zero proprietary OS APIs. When compiling for headless microcontrollers (such as the Arduino Mega or ESP32) using the -DNOSDL2 macro, this instruction routes all its graphical or I/O side effects through the Platform Abstraction Layer (PAL). Hardware implementers must ensure that platformsleep() and platformgetticks() are properly mapped in core/platform.c if this keyword involves timing, yielding, or hardware-level interrupts. In cases where the underlying hardware lacks a floating-point unit (FPU), the lexer automatically maps numeric outputs to 32-bit fixed integer types if -DBPPNOFLOAT is enforced.

11. Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) Life Cycle
During the parsing phase, the Recursive Descent Parser encounters the token associated with this keyword. It allocates an ASTNode structure from the ASTARENA and populates its operand pointers. At runtime, the astinterpreter.c engine performs a post-order traversal to evaluate all child expression nodes before triggering the final execution hook. This two-pass system guarantees that syntax errors (like mismatched parentheses or missing commas) are caught globally before any destructive side-effects occur. Once parsed, the ASTNode resides in memory until NEW or RUN is executed, at which point the entire arena is zeroed out to prevent memory leaks.

12. C17 Standard Safety & Security Boundaries
Security and isolation are paramount. This keyword utilizes strict bounds-checking to prevent buffer overflows. Internally, any array indexing or string manipulation defaults to sizet for addressing, preventing negative index wraps. Stack-smashing protections are enforced virtually by the MAXCALL_STACK limit defined in config.h. Any attempt by this keyword to access unallocated heap memory will trigger the interpreter's internal fault handler, raising a trappable BASIC error rather than causing a segmentation fault at the OS level.

13. Deterministic Execution & Regression Prevention
To prevent regressions across builds (Windows, Linux, or MCU), the execution of this keyword is entirely deterministic. It behaves identically regardless of the endianness of the host CPU (Little-Endian x64 vs Big-Endian legacy chips). The testing suite in selftests_all.c ensures that the byte-for-byte output of this operation remains identical. If a developer modifies the underlying C source code for this keyword, they MUST run the SELFTEST suite to verify that parsing precedence, token mapping, and garbage collection behavior have not drifted.

14. Performance Profiling & Optimization Rules
For developers writing performance-critical algorithms in BASIC++, be aware that calling this keyword inside a FOR...NEXT or WHILE...WEND loop incurs a minimal virtual dispatch overhead. Because the interpreter uses a switch-case dispatch engine in exec.c, the branch predictor on modern CPUs will optimize repeated calls. However, on 8-bit or 16-bit chips, minimizing the use of string-mutating variants of this keyword will drastically improve frame rates and execution speed.