TRACE

1. Syntax & Parameters
TRACE [ON | OFF]

- ON: Enables line tracing.
- OFF: Disables line tracing (equivalent to TROFF).

2. Description & Usage
The TRACE command enables the tracing of program execution. When active, the interpreter prints the line number of each statement as it is executed.
Usage: Highly useful for tracking the flow of control, especially through complex GOTO, GOSUB, or WHILE loops.
Edge Cases & Boundary Conditions: 
- If TRACE is executed in immediate mode, it applies to the next RUN command.
- Rapid execution of a tight loop with TRACE ON will flood the console and may cause buffer lag.
Syntax Combinations: Can be selectively enabled and disabled around problematic code blocks: 10 TRACE ON : GOSUB 100 : TRACE OFF.

3. Code Examples
`basic
10 FOR I = 1 TO 3
20 TRACE ON
30 PRINT I
40 TRACE OFF
50 NEXT I
`

4. Internal C-Source Mapping
- source/parser/trace_parser.c
- source/virtual/trace_vm.c

5. Implementation Details
The TRACE instruction intercepts the standard execution loop to output the current program counter's line number.
Execution Paths: Parses KW_TRACE. Depending on the arguments, it evaluates to enabling the trace state.
Struct Mutations: Sets the TRACEMODEACTIVE bit inside the rt->state struct. During the VM's main loop in vmrun(), if TRACEMODE_ACTIVE is true, a console output routine is called to print [Line X] before evaluating rt->pc->ast.
Troubleshooting: If line numbers are not printing, verify that console.h redirection is correctly receiving the trace output, and that TRACEMODEACTIVE is not being prematurely cleared by an error handler.

6. Cross-References / See Also
TROFF, DEBUG

7. Historical Context
Directly analogous to the classic TRON (Trace On) command found in GW-BASIC and QBASIC, modernized for the BASIC++ virtual machine architecture.

8. Manual Testing Guide
1. Launch basicpp-console.exe.
2. Type 10 TRACE ON : 20 X = 1 : 30 X = X + 1 : 40 TRACE OFF.
3. Type RUN.
4. You should see the line numbers [20], [30], and [40] printed to the console as the program executes.

9. Memory Management & Garbage Collection Profile
Under the hood, this keyword operates within the strict bounds of the BASIC++ deterministic memory manager (core/memory.c). When executed, any intermediate strings generated by this operation are routed to the Transient Memory Arena within the String Pool (core/stringpool.c). If the arena exceeds its high-water mark, an aggressive mark-and-sweep garbage collection pass is immediately triggered before the instruction completes. On embedded architectures (compiled with -DBPPLITEBUILD), this transient arena is statically clamped (default 4KB), meaning iterative loops invoking this keyword must be designed carefully to avoid ERROUTOF_MEMORY traps. Developers porting to bare-metal systems must verify that the memory.c heap allocator correctly points to a continuous SRAM block without fragmentation.

10. Portability & Hardware Porting Concerns
Because BASIC++ is strictly C17 ISO/IEC 9899:2018 compliant, this keyword relies on zero proprietary OS APIs. When compiling for headless microcontrollers (such as the Arduino Mega or ESP32) using the -DNOSDL2 macro, this instruction routes all its graphical or I/O side effects through the Platform Abstraction Layer (PAL). Hardware implementers must ensure that platformsleep() and platformgetticks() are properly mapped in core/platform.c if this keyword involves timing, yielding, or hardware-level interrupts. In cases where the underlying hardware lacks a floating-point unit (FPU), the lexer automatically maps numeric outputs to 32-bit fixed integer types if -DBPPNOFLOAT is enforced.

11. Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) Life Cycle
During the parsing phase, the Recursive Descent Parser encounters the token associated with this keyword. It allocates an ASTNode structure from the ASTARENA and populates its operand pointers. At runtime, the astinterpreter.c engine performs a post-order traversal to evaluate all child expression nodes before triggering the final execution hook. This two-pass system guarantees that syntax errors (like mismatched parentheses or missing commas) are caught globally before any destructive side-effects occur. Once parsed, the ASTNode resides in memory until NEW or RUN is executed, at which point the entire arena is zeroed out to prevent memory leaks.

12. C17 Standard Safety & Security Boundaries
Security and isolation are paramount. This keyword utilizes strict bounds-checking to prevent buffer overflows. Internally, any array indexing or string manipulation defaults to sizet for addressing, preventing negative index wraps. Stack-smashing protections are enforced virtually by the MAXCALL_STACK limit defined in config.h. Any attempt by this keyword to access unallocated heap memory will trigger the interpreter's internal fault handler, raising a trappable BASIC error rather than causing a segmentation fault at the OS level.

13. Deterministic Execution & Regression Prevention
To prevent regressions across builds (Windows, Linux, or MCU), the execution of this keyword is entirely deterministic. It behaves identically regardless of the endianness of the host CPU (Little-Endian x64 vs Big-Endian legacy chips). The testing suite in selftests_all.c ensures that the byte-for-byte output of this operation remains identical. If a developer modifies the underlying C source code for this keyword, they MUST run the SELFTEST suite to verify that parsing precedence, token mapping, and garbage collection behavior have not drifted.

14. Performance Profiling & Optimization Rules
For developers writing performance-critical algorithms in BASIC++, be aware that calling this keyword inside a FOR...NEXT or WHILE...WEND loop incurs a minimal virtual dispatch overhead. Because the interpreter uses a switch-case dispatch engine in exec.c, the branch predictor on modern CPUs will optimize repeated calls. However, on 8-bit or 16-bit chips, minimizing the use of string-mutating variants of this keyword will drastically improve frame rates and execution speed.