ALIAS

1. Syntax & Parameters
`ALIAS keyword = "newname"
ALIAS LIST | CLEAR | COUNT
ALIAS REMOVE "name"
ALIAS SAVE "file" | LOAD "file"
ALIAS LANG "code" | LANG LIST | LANG CLEAR
ALIAS OPER LIST
ALIAS "op" = "name"`

2. Description & Usage
Provides a comprehensive API for keyword aliasing, operator aliasing, and loading entire language packs. Allows developers and users to map native keywords to alternative strings, supporting localization (e.g., mapping PRINT to ESCRIBIR in Spanish) or syntactic sugar. Useful for dialect morphing and dynamic overrides.

Advanced NLP Depth: Edge Cases & Boundary Conditions:
- Lexical Precedence: When ALIAS interacts with other language constructs, the parser resolves it strictly before variable evaluation. If an identifier matches exactly, it triggers the routine.
- Boundary Conditions: Calling ALIAS with maximum argument lengths (e.g., strings over 255 characters or nesting limits) must be handled by the allocator. Out-of-bounds parameters will throw a SYNTAX ERROR or TYPE MISMATCH rather than overflowing.
- Complex Syntax Combinations: You can nest or chain this function conditionally (e.g., inside IF/THEN blocks, or multi-statement lines separated by colons) without state leaking.

3. Code Examples
`basic
ALIAS PRINT = "ECHO"
ECHO "Hello World!"
ALIAS LANG "ES" ' Loads Spanish keyword mappings
ALIAS LIST ' Displays current mappings
`

Advanced Execution Path Example:
`basic
' Demonstrating edge case and boundary condition for ALIAS
ON ERROR GOTO ErrorHandler
PRINT "Executing ALIAS..."
' Insert ALIAS usage here conditionally
END
ErrorHandler:
  PRINT "Trapped error in ALIAS: "; ERR
  RESUME NEXT
`

4. Internal C-Source Mapping
Implemented in config/parserconfig.c (piparsealias), aliaslang.c, and alias_lang.h.

5. Implementation Details
Modifies the lexical tokenization process. When the lexer encounters an identifier, it first checks the active alias tables (both global and program-scoped) before falling back to the native keyword list. Alias tables have a fixed capacity (MAX_ALIASES). Overloading or exceeding this capacity triggers an error. Language packs are predefined sets of aliases loaded sequentially. Alias bindings persist either globally or within the program scope depending on the execution context.

Execution Paths & Struct Mutations:
- Struct Mutation: The internal C struct representing the interpreter state (often struct basic_ctx) undergoes targeted mutations. Variables, string pools, or stack pointers are updated atomically. If ALIAS fails mid-execution, the AST node evaluator unwinds state to prevent memory leaks.
- Execution Path: The lexer tokenizes ALIAS, passing it to the parser, which constructs an AST node. The interpreter loops and matches the statement ID, invoking the underlying C function for ALIAS.
- Troubleshooting Scenarios: If ALIAS behaves unexpectedly, ensure no memory corruption occurred in previous lines. Check for pointer alignment issues (especially on 64-bit systems) where intptr_t conversions might have truncated. Recompile and run the SELFTEST.

6. Cross-References / See Also
OVERRIDE, OPTION, KEYWORD

7. Historical Context
A novel feature for BASIC++ that significantly extends the static keyword definitions of ECMA-116 and QBASIC, allowing for true multilingual and custom-dialect programming without recompiling the interpreter.

8. Manual Testing Guide
1. Launch basicpp-console.exe.
2. Type ALIAS PRINT = "SAY".
3. Type SAY "Testing" and verify it behaves identically to PRINT.
4. Type ALIAS LIST to view the mapping.

Note: Ensure both basicpp-console.exe and basicpp.exe are used to verify Cross-Platform Parity.

9. Memory Management & Garbage Collection Profile
Under the hood, this keyword operates within the strict bounds of the BASIC++ deterministic memory manager (core/memory.c). When executed, any intermediate strings generated by this operation are routed to the Transient Memory Arena within the String Pool (core/stringpool.c). If the arena exceeds its high-water mark, an aggressive mark-and-sweep garbage collection pass is immediately triggered before the instruction completes. On embedded architectures (compiled with -DBPPLITEBUILD), this transient arena is statically clamped (default 4KB), meaning iterative loops invoking this keyword must be designed carefully to avoid ERROUTOF_MEMORY traps. Developers porting to bare-metal systems must verify that the memory.c heap allocator correctly points to a continuous SRAM block without fragmentation.

10. Portability & Hardware Porting Concerns
Because BASIC++ is strictly C17 ISO/IEC 9899:2018 compliant, this keyword relies on zero proprietary OS APIs. When compiling for headless microcontrollers (such as the Arduino Mega or ESP32) using the -DNOSDL2 macro, this instruction routes all its graphical or I/O side effects through the Platform Abstraction Layer (PAL). Hardware implementers must ensure that platformsleep() and platformgetticks() are properly mapped in core/platform.c if this keyword involves timing, yielding, or hardware-level interrupts. In cases where the underlying hardware lacks a floating-point unit (FPU), the lexer automatically maps numeric outputs to 32-bit fixed integer types if -DBPPNOFLOAT is enforced.

11. Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) Life Cycle
During the parsing phase, the Recursive Descent Parser encounters the token associated with this keyword. It allocates an ASTNode structure from the ASTARENA and populates its operand pointers. At runtime, the astinterpreter.c engine performs a post-order traversal to evaluate all child expression nodes before triggering the final execution hook. This two-pass system guarantees that syntax errors (like mismatched parentheses or missing commas) are caught globally before any destructive side-effects occur. Once parsed, the ASTNode resides in memory until NEW or RUN is executed, at which point the entire arena is zeroed out to prevent memory leaks.

12. C17 Standard Safety & Security Boundaries
Security and isolation are paramount. This keyword utilizes strict bounds-checking to prevent buffer overflows. Internally, any array indexing or string manipulation defaults to sizet for addressing, preventing negative index wraps. Stack-smashing protections are enforced virtually by the MAXCALL_STACK limit defined in config.h. Any attempt by this keyword to access unallocated heap memory will trigger the interpreter's internal fault handler, raising a trappable BASIC error rather than causing a segmentation fault at the OS level.

13. Deterministic Execution & Regression Prevention
To prevent regressions across builds (Windows, Linux, or MCU), the execution of this keyword is entirely deterministic. It behaves identically regardless of the endianness of the host CPU (Little-Endian x64 vs Big-Endian legacy chips). The testing suite in selftests_all.c ensures that the byte-for-byte output of this operation remains identical. If a developer modifies the underlying C source code for this keyword, they MUST run the SELFTEST suite to verify that parsing precedence, token mapping, and garbage collection behavior have not drifted.

14. Performance Profiling & Optimization Rules
For developers writing performance-critical algorithms in BASIC++, be aware that calling this keyword inside a FOR...NEXT or WHILE...WEND loop incurs a minimal virtual dispatch overhead. Because the interpreter uses a switch-case dispatch engine in exec.c, the branch predictor on modern CPUs will optimize repeated calls. However, on 8-bit or 16-bit chips, minimizing the use of string-mutating variants of this keyword will drastically improve frame rates and execution speed.