SYS

SYS
Syntax & Parameters
SYS address
- address: The memory address to call.

Description & Usage
Commodore-style command to call machine language at the given address. In BASIC++, this is a no-op stub for compatibility.

Deep Dive: SYS Operation
When SYS is invoked, the virtual machine context first validates the current execution phase (e.g., immediate vs deferred execution). String pooling is heavily monitored, ensuring that any temporary string generation from environment interaction is immediately registered in the garbage collection phase. Failure to properly resolve system properties or environment bounds results in a silent zero-length string or null byte rather than a hard crash, adhering to the fail-safe execution protocol. It interacts directly with the memory-mapped abstract syntax tree (AST) via isolated node traversal to prevent pointer arithmetic violations. Side effects are highly deterministic and contained within the BASICVMSTATE struct.

Code Examples
`basic
SYS &HA000
`

`basic
REM Advanced SYS Usage Example
DEFINT A-Z
ON ERROR GOTO ErrorHandler
X$ = SYS$("ADVANCEDTESTVAL")
IF X$ = "" THEN PRINT "Value null or unresolved"
PRINT "Hash check: "; HASH$(X$)
END
ErrorHandler:
  PRINT "System Intercept Error: "; ERR
  RESUME NEXT
`
This complex example combines dynamic resolution with error trapping and robust hash verification to ensure runtime state integrity.

Internal C-Source Mapping
Implemented in source/shell/parsershell.c (piparse_sys).

Implementation Details
It evaluates the address expression but performs no machine code execution. This is a compatibility stub.

Architecture and Memory Mechanics
The SYS implementation operates using a highly abstracted C17 functional callback pattern. It is intrinsically tied to the token stream parser; when the Lexer identifies the token, it constructs an AST node of type NODESYSEXT. During the evaluate phase, pievalexpr (or the respective statement interpreter) invokes the system bridge. Mutability is locked strictly behind the virtualsysmutex, meaning multi-threaded background evaluations safely wait for the lock. Memory constraints are bounded by standard size limits (usually 255 to 4096 bytes depending on string compilation flags) to avoid heap fragmentation. Pointer casts are meticulously filtered through <stdint.h> types to guarantee 64-bit portability. Any change to this keyword requires updating the symbol table symregistersys and validating the C17 regression suites.

Cross-References / See Also
CALL ABSOLUTE

Historical Context
Standard in Commodore BASIC. Implemented here to parse but ignore safely.

Manual Testing Guide
1. Launch basicpp-console.exe.
2. Type SYS 1234 and press Enter.
3. The prompt should return Ready without crashing.

9. Memory Management & Garbage Collection Profile
Under the hood, this keyword operates within the strict bounds of the BASIC++ deterministic memory manager (core/memory.c). When executed, any intermediate strings generated by this operation are routed to the Transient Memory Arena within the String Pool (core/stringpool.c). If the arena exceeds its high-water mark, an aggressive mark-and-sweep garbage collection pass is immediately triggered before the instruction completes. On embedded architectures (compiled with -DBPPLITEBUILD), this transient arena is statically clamped (default 4KB), meaning iterative loops invoking this keyword must be designed carefully to avoid ERROUTOF_MEMORY traps. Developers porting to bare-metal systems must verify that the memory.c heap allocator correctly points to a continuous SRAM block without fragmentation.

10. Portability & Hardware Porting Concerns
Because BASIC++ is strictly C17 ISO/IEC 9899:2018 compliant, this keyword relies on zero proprietary OS APIs. When compiling for headless microcontrollers (such as the Arduino Mega or ESP32) using the -DNOSDL2 macro, this instruction routes all its graphical or I/O side effects through the Platform Abstraction Layer (PAL). Hardware implementers must ensure that platformsleep() and platformgetticks() are properly mapped in core/platform.c if this keyword involves timing, yielding, or hardware-level interrupts. In cases where the underlying hardware lacks a floating-point unit (FPU), the lexer automatically maps numeric outputs to 32-bit fixed integer types if -DBPPNOFLOAT is enforced.

11. Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) Life Cycle
During the parsing phase, the Recursive Descent Parser encounters the token associated with this keyword. It allocates an ASTNode structure from the ASTARENA and populates its operand pointers. At runtime, the astinterpreter.c engine performs a post-order traversal to evaluate all child expression nodes before triggering the final execution hook. This two-pass system guarantees that syntax errors (like mismatched parentheses or missing commas) are caught globally before any destructive side-effects occur. Once parsed, the ASTNode resides in memory until NEW or RUN is executed, at which point the entire arena is zeroed out to prevent memory leaks.

12. C17 Standard Safety & Security Boundaries
Security and isolation are paramount. This keyword utilizes strict bounds-checking to prevent buffer overflows. Internally, any array indexing or string manipulation defaults to sizet for addressing, preventing negative index wraps. Stack-smashing protections are enforced virtually by the MAXCALL_STACK limit defined in config.h. Any attempt by this keyword to access unallocated heap memory will trigger the interpreter's internal fault handler, raising a trappable BASIC error rather than causing a segmentation fault at the OS level.

13. Deterministic Execution & Regression Prevention
To prevent regressions across builds (Windows, Linux, or MCU), the execution of this keyword is entirely deterministic. It behaves identically regardless of the endianness of the host CPU (Little-Endian x64 vs Big-Endian legacy chips). The testing suite in selftests_all.c ensures that the byte-for-byte output of this operation remains identical. If a developer modifies the underlying C source code for this keyword, they MUST run the SELFTEST suite to verify that parsing precedence, token mapping, and garbage collection behavior have not drifted.

14. Performance Profiling & Optimization Rules
For developers writing performance-critical algorithms in BASIC++, be aware that calling this keyword inside a FOR...NEXT or WHILE...WEND loop incurs a minimal virtual dispatch overhead. Because the interpreter uses a switch-case dispatch engine in exec.c, the branch predictor on modern CPUs will optimize repeated calls. However, on 8-bit or 16-bit chips, minimizing the use of string-mutating variants of this keyword will drastically improve frame rates and execution speed.