MONTH$

1. Syntax & Parameters

Syntax:
`basic
MONTH$
`
Parameters:
- None. MONTH$ is a read-only String System Variable.

2. Description & Usage

Returns the name of the current month as a capitalized string (e.g., "January", "February", ..., "December").
Because it is a system variable, it does not require parentheses. It is read-only; you cannot assign a value to it (e.g., MONTH$ = 1 will throw a syntax error).

3. Code Examples

Example:
`basic
PRINT "We are in the month of "; MONTH$
`
Expected Output:
`text
We are in the month of July
`

4. Internal C-Source Mapping

- source/parser/parser_expr.c (Expression parsing)
source/lexer/lexer.c (Token definitions)

5. Implementation Details

Implemented as a string system variable. The lexer handles the string suffix to generate KWMONTHFUNC. During parsing, the current time is retrieved using C standard time functions. The tm_mon field serves as a 0-11 index into an internal C array of month names. The selected name is allocated into the interpreter's string pool and pushed to the value stack.
If the C standard library's time functions fail or are unavailable on a specific embedded platform, the value may default to the system epoch (1970). The memory allocated for the string pool (for string variables) is managed by the garbage collector and freed appropriately. If you alter the system clock while a script is running, the next invocation of MONTH$ will reflect the updated clock.

6. Cross-References / See Also

- MONTH, DAY$, YEAR, DATE$

7. Historical Context

While most retro BASIC interpreters lacked a direct way to retrieve the month name without lookup arrays, BASIC++ provides MONTH$ as a convenient feature avoiding boilerplate code.

8. Manual Testing Guide

To manually test this functionality, use the following commands in the command prompt or terminal:
- Windows:
  `cmd
  basicpp-console.exe -c "PRINT MONTH$"
  `
- Linux:
  `bash
  baspp-console -c "PRINT MONTH$"
  `

9. Memory Management & Garbage Collection Profile
Under the hood, this keyword operates within the strict bounds of the BASIC++ deterministic memory manager (core/memory.c). When executed, any intermediate strings generated by this operation are routed to the Transient Memory Arena within the String Pool (core/stringpool.c). If the arena exceeds its high-water mark, an aggressive mark-and-sweep garbage collection pass is immediately triggered before the instruction completes. On embedded architectures (compiled with -DBPPLITEBUILD), this transient arena is statically clamped (default 4KB), meaning iterative loops invoking this keyword must be designed carefully to avoid ERROUTOF_MEMORY traps. Developers porting to bare-metal systems must verify that the memory.c heap allocator correctly points to a continuous SRAM block without fragmentation.

10. Portability & Hardware Porting Concerns
Because BASIC++ is strictly C17 ISO/IEC 9899:2018 compliant, this keyword relies on zero proprietary OS APIs. When compiling for headless microcontrollers (such as the Arduino Mega or ESP32) using the -DNOSDL2 macro, this instruction routes all its graphical or I/O side effects through the Platform Abstraction Layer (PAL). Hardware implementers must ensure that platformsleep() and platformgetticks() are properly mapped in core/platform.c if this keyword involves timing, yielding, or hardware-level interrupts. In cases where the underlying hardware lacks a floating-point unit (FPU), the lexer automatically maps numeric outputs to 32-bit fixed integer types if -DBPPNOFLOAT is enforced.

11. Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) Life Cycle
During the parsing phase, the Recursive Descent Parser encounters the token associated with this keyword. It allocates an ASTNode structure from the ASTARENA and populates its operand pointers. At runtime, the astinterpreter.c engine performs a post-order traversal to evaluate all child expression nodes before triggering the final execution hook. This two-pass system guarantees that syntax errors (like mismatched parentheses or missing commas) are caught globally before any destructive side-effects occur. Once parsed, the ASTNode resides in memory until NEW or RUN is executed, at which point the entire arena is zeroed out to prevent memory leaks.

12. C17 Standard Safety & Security Boundaries
Security and isolation are paramount. This keyword utilizes strict bounds-checking to prevent buffer overflows. Internally, any array indexing or string manipulation defaults to sizet for addressing, preventing negative index wraps. Stack-smashing protections are enforced virtually by the MAXCALL_STACK limit defined in config.h. Any attempt by this keyword to access unallocated heap memory will trigger the interpreter's internal fault handler, raising a trappable BASIC error rather than causing a segmentation fault at the OS level.

13. Deterministic Execution & Regression Prevention
To prevent regressions across builds (Windows, Linux, or MCU), the execution of this keyword is entirely deterministic. It behaves identically regardless of the endianness of the host CPU (Little-Endian x64 vs Big-Endian legacy chips). The testing suite in selftests_all.c ensures that the byte-for-byte output of this operation remains identical. If a developer modifies the underlying C source code for this keyword, they MUST run the SELFTEST suite to verify that parsing precedence, token mapping, and garbage collection behavior have not drifted.

14. Performance Profiling & Optimization Rules
For developers writing performance-critical algorithms in BASIC++, be aware that calling this keyword inside a FOR...NEXT or WHILE...WEND loop incurs a minimal virtual dispatch overhead. Because the interpreter uses a switch-case dispatch engine in exec.c, the branch predictor on modern CPUs will optimize repeated calls. However, on 8-bit or 16-bit chips, minimizing the use of string-mutating variants of this keyword will drastically improve frame rates and execution speed.