TRUE

1. Syntax & Parameters
TRUE
- No parameters. TRUE is a read-only system variable.

2. Description & Usage
The TRUE system variable evaluates directly to a predefined integer representing boolean truth. Utilizing the TRUE keyword instead of hardcoding numeric values (such as -1 or 1) heavily enhances code readability and guarantees portability across varying BASIC dialects, particularly between GW-BASIC, QBASIC, and ECMA-116 profiles.

TRUE is predominantly used in conditional assignments, infinite loop constructions (e.g., WHILE TRUE), and explicitly setting logical state flags. It is a system-reserved constant, meaning that assignment attempts (e.g., LET TRUE = 1) will throw a definitive Syntax Error.

3. Code Examples
`basic
10 LET FLAG = TRUE
20 IF FLAG = TRUE THEN PRINT "The flag is active!"
30 WHILE TRUE
40   PRINT "Infinite loop (Press CTRL+C to break)"
50   BREAK
60 WEND
70 PRINT "Numeric value of TRUE is: "; TRUE
`

4. Internal C-Source Mapping
- source/help/help.c: Maps TRUE to its description and category HCAT_SYSVAR.
- source/core/eval.c: Evaluates TOK_TRUE and pushes the corresponding integer onto the evaluation stack.
- source/codegen/bytecode.c: PCODE jumps (PCODEJUMPTRUE) map execution pathways based on truthiness.

5. Implementation Details
TRUE acts as a hardcoded read-only system variable parsed at the expression level. Upon lexical analysis, "TRUE" is converted to a specific token (TOKTRUE or KWTRUE). During bytecode compilation and evaluation, this token is dynamically replaced with the system's active representation of truth.

Because BASIC++ supports multiple underlying architectures and dialect modes, TRUE prevents legacy programs from breaking if the internal representation of truth differs from the traditional all-bits-set (-1) implementation. If truthy operations fail to trigger branches, developers should audit the PCODEJUMPTRUE logic in pcode_compiler.c to ensure bitwise masking correctly traps the emitted TRUE token.

6. Cross-References / See Also
- FALSE
- AND
- OR
- NOT
- XOR

7. Historical Context
In traditional GW-BASIC and QBASIC, boolean TRUE was strictly evaluated as -1 (all bits set to 1 in a signed integer), which allowed bitwise operators (AND, OR, NOT) to double as logical operators perfectly. Other programming languages (like C) evaluate truth as 1. By providing a built-in TRUE constant, BASIC++ shields the programmer from dialectal variations in boolean representation, offering full ECMA-116 and QBASIC compatibility.

8. Manual Testing Guide
To manually verify the integrity of the TRUE keyword:
1. Open the console via basicpp-console.exe (Windows) or ./baspp-console (Linux).
2. Enter the following test program:
   `basic
   10 PRINT "The value of TRUE is: "; TRUE
   20 IF TRUE THEN PRINT "SUCCESS" ELSE PRINT "FAILED"
   `
3. Type RUN and press Enter.
4. The console must output the numeric value of TRUE followed immediately by SUCCESS.

9. Memory Management & Garbage Collection Profile
Under the hood, this keyword operates within the strict bounds of the BASIC++ deterministic memory manager (core/memory.c). When executed, any intermediate strings generated by this operation are routed to the Transient Memory Arena within the String Pool (core/stringpool.c). If the arena exceeds its high-water mark, an aggressive mark-and-sweep garbage collection pass is immediately triggered before the instruction completes. On embedded architectures (compiled with -DBPPLITEBUILD), this transient arena is statically clamped (default 4KB), meaning iterative loops invoking this keyword must be designed carefully to avoid ERROUTOF_MEMORY traps. Developers porting to bare-metal systems must verify that the memory.c heap allocator correctly points to a continuous SRAM block without fragmentation.

10. Portability & Hardware Porting Concerns
Because BASIC++ is strictly C17 ISO/IEC 9899:2018 compliant, this keyword relies on zero proprietary OS APIs. When compiling for headless microcontrollers (such as the Arduino Mega or ESP32) using the -DNOSDL2 macro, this instruction routes all its graphical or I/O side effects through the Platform Abstraction Layer (PAL). Hardware implementers must ensure that platformsleep() and platformgetticks() are properly mapped in core/platform.c if this keyword involves timing, yielding, or hardware-level interrupts. In cases where the underlying hardware lacks a floating-point unit (FPU), the lexer automatically maps numeric outputs to 32-bit fixed integer types if -DBPPNOFLOAT is enforced.

11. Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) Life Cycle
During the parsing phase, the Recursive Descent Parser encounters the token associated with this keyword. It allocates an ASTNode structure from the ASTARENA and populates its operand pointers. At runtime, the astinterpreter.c engine performs a post-order traversal to evaluate all child expression nodes before triggering the final execution hook. This two-pass system guarantees that syntax errors (like mismatched parentheses or missing commas) are caught globally before any destructive side-effects occur. Once parsed, the ASTNode resides in memory until NEW or RUN is executed, at which point the entire arena is zeroed out to prevent memory leaks.

12. C17 Standard Safety & Security Boundaries
Security and isolation are paramount. This keyword utilizes strict bounds-checking to prevent buffer overflows. Internally, any array indexing or string manipulation defaults to sizet for addressing, preventing negative index wraps. Stack-smashing protections are enforced virtually by the MAXCALL_STACK limit defined in config.h. Any attempt by this keyword to access unallocated heap memory will trigger the interpreter's internal fault handler, raising a trappable BASIC error rather than causing a segmentation fault at the OS level.

13. Deterministic Execution & Regression Prevention
To prevent regressions across builds (Windows, Linux, or MCU), the execution of this keyword is entirely deterministic. It behaves identically regardless of the endianness of the host CPU (Little-Endian x64 vs Big-Endian legacy chips). The testing suite in selftests_all.c ensures that the byte-for-byte output of this operation remains identical. If a developer modifies the underlying C source code for this keyword, they MUST run the SELFTEST suite to verify that parsing precedence, token mapping, and garbage collection behavior have not drifted.

14. Performance Profiling & Optimization Rules
For developers writing performance-critical algorithms in BASIC++, be aware that calling this keyword inside a FOR...NEXT or WHILE...WEND loop incurs a minimal virtual dispatch overhead. Because the interpreter uses a switch-case dispatch engine in exec.c, the branch predictor on modern CPUs will optimize repeated calls. However, on 8-bit or 16-bit chips, minimizing the use of string-mutating variants of this keyword will drastically improve frame rates and execution speed.