FILEMOD$

1. Syntax & Parameters
date_string$ = FILEMOD$(filename$)
- filename$: The path to the target file.

2. Description & Usage
Returns the last modified date and time of the specified file as a formatted string (e.g., YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS). It is primarily utilized for file synchronization routines, caching algorithms, or creating logging utilities that react to updated files.

3. Code Examples
`basic
10 IF EXISTS("DATA.TXT") THEN PRINT "Last updated: "; FILEMOD$("DATA.TXT")
`

4. Internal C-Source Mapping
- Function: builtinfilemod in source/io/builtinsfileio.c
- Registration: builtins.c under KW_FILEMOD

5. Implementation Details
Queries the platform-specific VFS stat data for the target file to retrieve its last modification mtime timestamp.
Edge Cases & Boundary Conditions:
- If the file does not exist, FILEMOD$ will safely return an empty string "" or trigger a File not found error, depending on the internal VFS strictness flag.
- The returned timestamp string is rigorously bounded to 19 characters to prevent buffer overflows during standard POSIX strftime() conversions.
- Troubleshooting: If the output string appears corrupted or blank, it implies the host OS failed to return a valid epoch timestamp, or the file is heavily locked by another process (like an anti-virus scanner).

6. Cross-References / See Also
- EXISTS, FILESIZE

7. Historical Context
This is a modern system-level integration function completely absent in traditional classic BASIC dialects. Older DOS programs relied on external interrupt calls (INT 21h) to fetch metadata.

8. Manual Testing Guide
Interactive Test:
1. Launch basicpp-console.exe.
2. Type PRINT FILEMOD$("basicpp-console.exe") and verify it outputs a valid datetime string.

Scripted Test (.BAS):
`basic
10 OPEN "O", 1, "temp.log"
20 PRINT #1, "123"
30 CLOSE 1
40 M$ = FILEMOD$("temp.log")
50 PRINT "Log created at: "; M$
60 KILL "temp.log"
`

9. Memory Management & Garbage Collection Profile
Under the hood, this keyword operates within the strict bounds of the BASIC++ deterministic memory manager (core/memory.c). When executed, any intermediate strings generated by this operation are routed to the Transient Memory Arena within the String Pool (core/stringpool.c). If the arena exceeds its high-water mark, an aggressive mark-and-sweep garbage collection pass is immediately triggered before the instruction completes. On embedded architectures (compiled with -DBPPLITEBUILD), this transient arena is statically clamped (default 4KB), meaning iterative loops invoking this keyword must be designed carefully to avoid ERROUTOF_MEMORY traps. Developers porting to bare-metal systems must verify that the memory.c heap allocator correctly points to a continuous SRAM block without fragmentation.

10. Portability & Hardware Porting Concerns
Because BASIC++ is strictly C17 ISO/IEC 9899:2018 compliant, this keyword relies on zero proprietary OS APIs. When compiling for headless microcontrollers (such as the Arduino Mega or ESP32) using the -DNOSDL2 macro, this instruction routes all its graphical or I/O side effects through the Platform Abstraction Layer (PAL). Hardware implementers must ensure that platformsleep() and platformgetticks() are properly mapped in core/platform.c if this keyword involves timing, yielding, or hardware-level interrupts. In cases where the underlying hardware lacks a floating-point unit (FPU), the lexer automatically maps numeric outputs to 32-bit fixed integer types if -DBPPNOFLOAT is enforced.

11. Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) Life Cycle
During the parsing phase, the Recursive Descent Parser encounters the token associated with this keyword. It allocates an ASTNode structure from the ASTARENA and populates its operand pointers. At runtime, the astinterpreter.c engine performs a post-order traversal to evaluate all child expression nodes before triggering the final execution hook. This two-pass system guarantees that syntax errors (like mismatched parentheses or missing commas) are caught globally before any destructive side-effects occur. Once parsed, the ASTNode resides in memory until NEW or RUN is executed, at which point the entire arena is zeroed out to prevent memory leaks.

12. C17 Standard Safety & Security Boundaries
Security and isolation are paramount. This keyword utilizes strict bounds-checking to prevent buffer overflows. Internally, any array indexing or string manipulation defaults to sizet for addressing, preventing negative index wraps. Stack-smashing protections are enforced virtually by the MAXCALL_STACK limit defined in config.h. Any attempt by this keyword to access unallocated heap memory will trigger the interpreter's internal fault handler, raising a trappable BASIC error rather than causing a segmentation fault at the OS level.

13. Deterministic Execution & Regression Prevention
To prevent regressions across builds (Windows, Linux, or MCU), the execution of this keyword is entirely deterministic. It behaves identically regardless of the endianness of the host CPU (Little-Endian x64 vs Big-Endian legacy chips). The testing suite in selftests_all.c ensures that the byte-for-byte output of this operation remains identical. If a developer modifies the underlying C source code for this keyword, they MUST run the SELFTEST suite to verify that parsing precedence, token mapping, and garbage collection behavior have not drifted.

14. Performance Profiling & Optimization Rules
For developers writing performance-critical algorithms in BASIC++, be aware that calling this keyword inside a FOR...NEXT or WHILE...WEND loop incurs a minimal virtual dispatch overhead. Because the interpreter uses a switch-case dispatch engine in exec.c, the branch predictor on modern CPUs will optimize repeated calls. However, on 8-bit or 16-bit chips, minimizing the use of string-mutating variants of this keyword will drastically improve frame rates and execution speed.