MEM

1. Syntax & Parameters
MEM
- No parameters. MEM acts as a read-only system variable/function.

2. Description & Usage
The MEM keyword returns the total amount of free, unallocated variable memory available to the BASIC program, measured in bytes. This allows the programmer to proactively check system resources before dimensioning large arrays or allocating substantial string buffers, thereby avoiding catastrophic "Out of Memory" runtime errors.

MEM specifically inspects the active variable memory pool (which scales based on platform constraints, e.g., 4 KB on embedded, 1 MB on 64-bit systems). If a program dynamically dimensions arrays, monitoring the MEM output will precisely reflect the corresponding drop in available bytes.

3. Code Examples
`basic
10 PRINT "Available memory at start: "; MEM; " bytes"
20 DIM A(1000)
30 PRINT "Available memory after array: "; MEM; " bytes"
40 IF MEM < 1024 THEN PRINT "Warning: Memory critically low!"
`

4. Internal C-Source Mapping
- source/parser/parserexpr.c: Evaluates KWMEM and calculates available space via size - used.
- source/lexer/lexer.c: Contains the lexical mapping for the "MEM" keyword.
- source/core/memory.c: Manages the underlying structural pools referenced by MEM (rt->memory->variable).
- source/config.h: Defines the baseline sizes for VARIABLEMEMORYSIZE.

5. Implementation Details
During expression parsing, when the AST hits KW_MEM, the interpreter instantly queries the live runtime memory structures, specifically rt->memory->variable.size (the total allocated pool limit) minus rt->memory->variable.used (the bytes currently claimed). The result is pushed to the evaluation stack as a standard integer.

Because the calculation happens natively in the C-source at the moment the token is evaluated, MEM is completely accurate to the microsecond. If MEM yields negative numbers, verify that the VARIABLEMEMORYSIZE in config.h has not overflowed a 16-bit signed integer boundary without being properly cast to a larger type.

6. Cross-References / See Also
- SIZE
- FRE
- VMEM
- CLEAR

7. Historical Context
In historic microcomputers with extremely constrained RAM (e.g., 64K limits), querying free memory was a vital operation. GW-BASIC provided FRE(0) or FRE("") to return free bytes and simultaneously trigger garbage collection. MEM was introduced in subsequent dialects to strictly decouple the act of "querying free memory" from the expensive act of "garbage collecting the string pool." In BASIC++, MEM is instantaneous and strictly reports variable pool boundaries.

8. Manual Testing Guide
To manually verify the integrity of the MEM keyword:
1. Open the console via basicpp-console.exe (Windows) or ./baspp-console (Linux).
2. Enter the following test program:
   `basic
   10 M1 = MEM
   20 DIM TEST_ARRAY(500)
   30 M2 = MEM
   40 PRINT "Memory lost: "; M1 - M2; " bytes"
   `
3. Type RUN and press Enter.
4. The console must output a positive integer representing the byte footprint of a 500-element default precision array.

9. Memory Management & Garbage Collection Profile
Under the hood, this keyword operates within the strict bounds of the BASIC++ deterministic memory manager (core/memory.c). When executed, any intermediate strings generated by this operation are routed to the Transient Memory Arena within the String Pool (core/stringpool.c). If the arena exceeds its high-water mark, an aggressive mark-and-sweep garbage collection pass is immediately triggered before the instruction completes. On embedded architectures (compiled with -DBPPLITEBUILD), this transient arena is statically clamped (default 4KB), meaning iterative loops invoking this keyword must be designed carefully to avoid ERROUTOF_MEMORY traps. Developers porting to bare-metal systems must verify that the memory.c heap allocator correctly points to a continuous SRAM block without fragmentation.

10. Portability & Hardware Porting Concerns
Because BASIC++ is strictly C17 ISO/IEC 9899:2018 compliant, this keyword relies on zero proprietary OS APIs. When compiling for headless microcontrollers (such as the Arduino Mega or ESP32) using the -DNOSDL2 macro, this instruction routes all its graphical or I/O side effects through the Platform Abstraction Layer (PAL). Hardware implementers must ensure that platformsleep() and platformgetticks() are properly mapped in core/platform.c if this keyword involves timing, yielding, or hardware-level interrupts. In cases where the underlying hardware lacks a floating-point unit (FPU), the lexer automatically maps numeric outputs to 32-bit fixed integer types if -DBPPNOFLOAT is enforced.

11. Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) Life Cycle
During the parsing phase, the Recursive Descent Parser encounters the token associated with this keyword. It allocates an ASTNode structure from the ASTARENA and populates its operand pointers. At runtime, the astinterpreter.c engine performs a post-order traversal to evaluate all child expression nodes before triggering the final execution hook. This two-pass system guarantees that syntax errors (like mismatched parentheses or missing commas) are caught globally before any destructive side-effects occur. Once parsed, the ASTNode resides in memory until NEW or RUN is executed, at which point the entire arena is zeroed out to prevent memory leaks.

12. C17 Standard Safety & Security Boundaries
Security and isolation are paramount. This keyword utilizes strict bounds-checking to prevent buffer overflows. Internally, any array indexing or string manipulation defaults to sizet for addressing, preventing negative index wraps. Stack-smashing protections are enforced virtually by the MAXCALL_STACK limit defined in config.h. Any attempt by this keyword to access unallocated heap memory will trigger the interpreter's internal fault handler, raising a trappable BASIC error rather than causing a segmentation fault at the OS level.

13. Deterministic Execution & Regression Prevention
To prevent regressions across builds (Windows, Linux, or MCU), the execution of this keyword is entirely deterministic. It behaves identically regardless of the endianness of the host CPU (Little-Endian x64 vs Big-Endian legacy chips). The testing suite in selftests_all.c ensures that the byte-for-byte output of this operation remains identical. If a developer modifies the underlying C source code for this keyword, they MUST run the SELFTEST suite to verify that parsing precedence, token mapping, and garbage collection behavior have not drifted.

14. Performance Profiling & Optimization Rules
For developers writing performance-critical algorithms in BASIC++, be aware that calling this keyword inside a FOR...NEXT or WHILE...WEND loop incurs a minimal virtual dispatch overhead. Because the interpreter uses a switch-case dispatch engine in exec.c, the branch predictor on modern CPUs will optimize repeated calls. However, on 8-bit or 16-bit chips, minimizing the use of string-mutating variants of this keyword will drastically improve frame rates and execution speed.