TASK

1. Syntax & Parameters
TASK <taskid>, <linenumber | label>
TASK <task_id> SUSPEND | RESUME | KILL

*   task_id: An integer expression evaluating to a valid task identifier (e.g., 1-16 depending on the configuration) representing the background thread or coroutine to be managed.
*   line_number: An integer literal representing a valid, existing line number where the new task should begin execution.
*   label: An alphanumeric label (which must be defined elsewhere in the code with a trailing colon, e.g., MyTaskLabel:) where the task should begin execution.
*   SUSPEND: Keyword to pause a currently running task without destroying its state or call stack.
*   RESUME: Keyword to resume a previously suspended task from where it was paused.
*   KILL: Keyword to forcefully terminate a task, freeing its resources and call stack.

2. Description & Usage
The TASK command introduces cooperative or preemptive multitasking (depending on the target OS layer) to the BASIC++ ecosystem. It allows the programmer to spawn, suspend, resume, and kill secondary execution threads that run concurrently with the main program loop.

Usage:
In modern BASIC++, TASK is utilized for background processing, such as handling intense calculations, network polling, asynchronous file I/O, or independent sprite animations, without blocking the main event loop or user interface.

Edge Cases & Boundary Conditions:
*   Invalid Task ID: Providing a taskid out of the allowed range (e.g., negative or greater than MAXTASKS) will result in an ERRILLEGALFUNCTIONCALL or ERROUTOFRANGE.
*   Task Limit Exceeded: Attempting to spawn a new task when all task slots are currently active will throw an ERROUTOFMEMORY or ERRTOOMANYTASKS.
*   Target Not Found: If the target linenumber or label for a new task does not exist, an ERRUNDEFINEDLINE or ERRUNDEFINED_LABEL is thrown at the time of task creation.
*   Modifying Non-Existent Tasks: Attempting to SUSPEND, RESUME, or KILL a task that has already finished or was never started will typically fail silently or return a state warning, but will not crash the interpreter.
*   Shared State & Race Conditions: Tasks share the same global variable space unless explicitly scoped. Modifying the same global strings or arrays simultaneously from multiple tasks without careful synchronization can lead to unpredictable string pool corruption or race conditions. 

3. Code Examples

Spawning a Background Task:
`basic
10 PRINT "Main Task Starting"
20 TASK 1, 100
30 FOR I = 1 TO 5
40   PRINT "Main: "; I
50   SLEEP 1
60 NEXT I
70 END
100 ' Background Task 1
110 FOR J = 1 TO 5
120   PRINT "  Background: "; J
130   SLEEP 1
140 NEXT J
150 RETURN
`

Task Suspension and Resumption:
`basic
10 TASK 1, TaskLoop
20 SLEEP 2
30 PRINT "Suspending Task 1"
40 TASK 1 SUSPEND
50 SLEEP 2
60 PRINT "Resuming Task 1"
70 TASK 1 RESUME
80 SLEEP 2
90 TASK 1 KILL
100 END
TaskLoop:
  PRINT "Task 1 is running..."
  SLEEP 1
  GOTO TaskLoop
`

4. Internal C-Source Mapping
*   source/parser/parser_multitasking.c
*   source/runtime/vm_task.c
*   include/vm_task.h

5. Implementation Details
The TASK instruction is identified in the Lexer by the KWTASK token, followed optionally by KWSUSPEND, KWRESUME, or KWKILL.

Parser Expectations:
The parser maps the first argument as an expression representing the taskid. If followed by a comma, it expects a target linenumber or label and constructs an ASTTASKSTART node. If followed by a state keyword, it constructs an ASTTASKSTATE node with the corresponding action flag.

Struct Mutations:
*   vm->tasks[taskid]: Mutated. The virtual machine maintains an array or linked list of taskstate structures. 
*   task_state->pc: Initialized to the target AST node when starting.
*   taskstate->status: Mutated between TASKRUNNING, TASKSUSPENDED, and TASKDEAD.
*   Call Stack Allocation: A new, separate call stack is allocated for the spawned task to handle its own GOSUB/RETURN operations independent of the main thread.

Execution Paths & Error Handling:
1. Evaluate taskid. Ensure 0 < taskid <= MAX_TASKS.
2. For creation: Verify target exists. Allocate stack. Set status = TASK_RUNNING. Set pc = target.
3. For state changes: Find task in table. Mutate status. If KILL, deallocate stack and zero the entry.
4. The VM's main execution loop (vm_execute) iterates over all active tasks (round-robin scheduling), executing a defined number of bytecode instructions or AST nodes per timeslice.
5. If a task hits an unhandled error, only that task is killed, and the error may be reported to the main thread's ERR system.

What to do if it breaks:
If tasks are not executing, check the round-robin scheduler in vmtask.c inside vmexecute(). Ensure vmyield() is correctly passing control to background tasks. If variables are being corrupted, investigate the thread-safety of the stringpool and variable lookup tables; you may need to introduce mutexes if the underlying implementation utilizes actual OS threads rather than VM-level coroutines.

6. Cross-References / See Also
*   SLEEP
*   YIELD
*   ON TIMER

7. Historical Context
Classic Microsoft BASICs (like GW-BASIC and QBASIC) did not have true multitasking or a TASK keyword; they relied on event trapping (like ON TIMER or ON KEY) which simulated concurrency by interrupting the main loop. Modern extended dialects and BASIC++ introduce explicit TASK control to take advantage of multi-core processors and modern OS threading models, while keeping the syntax approachable.

8. Manual Testing Guide
1. Launch basicpp-console.exe (Windows) or baspp-console (Linux).
2. To test spawning, type:
   `
   10 TASK 1, 50
   20 PRINT "A" : SLEEP 1 : PRINT "B" : END
   50 PRINT "1" : SLEEP 1 : PRINT "2" : RETURN
   `
   Type RUN. Output should interleave "A", "1", "B", "2".
3. To test killing, type:
   `
   10 TASK 1, 50
   20 PRINT "Main" : TASK 1 KILL : SLEEP 2 : END
   50 PRINT "Task" : SLEEP 1 : GOTO 50
   `
   Type RUN. The task should print once (or not at all depending on scheduling), but should not continue printing after the kill command.
4. To test task limits, write a FOR loop spawning 100 tasks and verify the interpreter throws an expected error (e.g., ERRTOOMANY_TASKS) rather than crashing.

9. Memory Management & Garbage Collection Profile
Under the hood, this keyword operates within the strict bounds of the BASIC++ deterministic memory manager (core/memory.c). When executed, any intermediate strings generated by this operation are routed to the Transient Memory Arena within the String Pool (core/stringpool.c). If the arena exceeds its high-water mark, an aggressive mark-and-sweep garbage collection pass is immediately triggered before the instruction completes. On embedded architectures (compiled with -DBPPLITEBUILD), this transient arena is statically clamped (default 4KB), meaning iterative loops invoking this keyword must be designed carefully to avoid ERROUTOF_MEMORY traps. Developers porting to bare-metal systems must verify that the memory.c heap allocator correctly points to a continuous SRAM block without fragmentation.

10. Portability & Hardware Porting Concerns
Because BASIC++ is strictly C17 ISO/IEC 9899:2018 compliant, this keyword relies on zero proprietary OS APIs. When compiling for headless microcontrollers (such as the Arduino Mega or ESP32) using the -DNOSDL2 macro, this instruction routes all its graphical or I/O side effects through the Platform Abstraction Layer (PAL). Hardware implementers must ensure that platformsleep() and platformgetticks() are properly mapped in core/platform.c if this keyword involves timing, yielding, or hardware-level interrupts. In cases where the underlying hardware lacks a floating-point unit (FPU), the lexer automatically maps numeric outputs to 32-bit fixed integer types if -DBPPNOFLOAT is enforced.

11. Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) Life Cycle
During the parsing phase, the Recursive Descent Parser encounters the token associated with this keyword. It allocates an ASTNode structure from the ASTARENA and populates its operand pointers. At runtime, the astinterpreter.c engine performs a post-order traversal to evaluate all child expression nodes before triggering the final execution hook. This two-pass system guarantees that syntax errors (like mismatched parentheses or missing commas) are caught globally before any destructive side-effects occur. Once parsed, the ASTNode resides in memory until NEW or RUN is executed, at which point the entire arena is zeroed out to prevent memory leaks.

12. C17 Standard Safety & Security Boundaries
Security and isolation are paramount. This keyword utilizes strict bounds-checking to prevent buffer overflows. Internally, any array indexing or string manipulation defaults to sizet for addressing, preventing negative index wraps. Stack-smashing protections are enforced virtually by the MAXCALL_STACK limit defined in config.h. Any attempt by this keyword to access unallocated heap memory will trigger the interpreter's internal fault handler, raising a trappable BASIC error rather than causing a segmentation fault at the OS level.

13. Deterministic Execution & Regression Prevention
To prevent regressions across builds (Windows, Linux, or MCU), the execution of this keyword is entirely deterministic. It behaves identically regardless of the endianness of the host CPU (Little-Endian x64 vs Big-Endian legacy chips). The testing suite in selftests_all.c ensures that the byte-for-byte output of this operation remains identical. If a developer modifies the underlying C source code for this keyword, they MUST run the SELFTEST suite to verify that parsing precedence, token mapping, and garbage collection behavior have not drifted.

14. Performance Profiling & Optimization Rules
For developers writing performance-critical algorithms in BASIC++, be aware that calling this keyword inside a FOR...NEXT or WHILE...WEND loop incurs a minimal virtual dispatch overhead. Because the interpreter uses a switch-case dispatch engine in exec.c, the branch predictor on modern CPUs will optimize repeated calls. However, on 8-bit or 16-bit chips, minimizing the use of string-mutating variants of this keyword will drastically improve frame rates and execution speed.