HOSTNAME$

1. Syntax & Parameters

Syntax:
HOSTNAME$

Parameters:
None. HOSTNAME$ is a parameterless system string function.

2. Description & Usage

The HOSTNAME$ function returns the network name (hostname) of the local computer running the BASIC++ interpreter as a string.

This is highly useful for diagnostic scripts, networking initialization, logging, or uniquely identifying the execution environment when BASIC++ scripts are distributed across multiple machines in a cluster or LAN. 

Note on Command Form: 
BASIC++ also supports a command statement form without the string suffix (HOSTNAME), which simply prints the hostname directly to the console output. The HOSTNAME$ function form is used when you need to assign the value to a variable or evaluate it within an expression.

3. Code Examples

Example 1: Basic String Assignment
`basic
H$ = HOSTNAME$
PRINT "This script is running on: " + H$
`

Example 2: Conditional Execution by Host
`basic
IF HOSTNAME$ = "DEV-SERVER-01" THEN
    PRINT "Development environment detected. Bypassing login."
    GOSUB 5000 ' Dev mode init
END IF
`

Example 3: Command Statement Form
`basic
' Prints the hostname directly to the screen
HOSTNAME 
`

4. Internal C-Source Mapping

- Lexer/Parser: source/parser/parserexpr.c (Expression parsing block) and source/help/parserhelp.c (Command form piparsehostname)
- Tokens: KWHOSTNAMEFUNC

5. Implementation Details

- Execution Path (Function Form): During expression evaluation in parserexpr.c, encountering KWHOSTNAME_FUNC triggers an inline system call to retrieve the computer's name. The resulting string is pushed onto the evaluation stack.
- OS API Interaction: 
  - On Windows (_WIN32), it uses the Win32 API GetComputerNameA().
  - On POSIX/Linux, it uses the standard gethostname() system call.
  - As a fallback (especially in the command parser form piparsehostname), it may look up the COMPUTERNAME or HOSTNAME OS environment variables. If all methods fail, it defaults to "localhost".
- Memory Management: The retrieved string is allocated within the BASIC++ garbage-collected string pool (strpool_store).
- Troubleshooting: If the hostname returns as "localhost" unexpectedly, it indicates the OS network layer is unconfigured, or the underlying system calls (GetComputerNameA or gethostname) failed due to lack of permissions or OS misconfiguration.

6. Cross-References / See Also

- USERNAME$
- ENVIRON$
- VARS

7. Historical Context

Legacy BASIC interpreters like GW-BASIC or QBASIC had no built-in awareness of networking or hostnames, as they were originally built for standalone single-tasking DOS systems. HOSTNAME$ is a modern addition in BASIC++ to support network-aware execution environments.

8. Manual Testing Guide

1. Open basicpp-console.exe (Windows) or baspp-console (Linux).
2. Type PRINT HOSTNAME$ and press Enter.
3. Validate that the printed string matches your computer's actual network name (you can verify this by typing hostname in a standard command prompt or terminal).
4. Type the command statement form HOSTNAME and press Enter to verify it prints the identical value.

9. Memory Management & Garbage Collection Profile
Under the hood, this keyword operates within the strict bounds of the BASIC++ deterministic memory manager (core/memory.c). When executed, any intermediate strings generated by this operation are routed to the Transient Memory Arena within the String Pool (core/stringpool.c). If the arena exceeds its high-water mark, an aggressive mark-and-sweep garbage collection pass is immediately triggered before the instruction completes. On embedded architectures (compiled with -DBPPLITEBUILD), this transient arena is statically clamped (default 4KB), meaning iterative loops invoking this keyword must be designed carefully to avoid ERROUTOF_MEMORY traps. Developers porting to bare-metal systems must verify that the memory.c heap allocator correctly points to a continuous SRAM block without fragmentation.

10. Portability & Hardware Porting Concerns
Because BASIC++ is strictly C17 ISO/IEC 9899:2018 compliant, this keyword relies on zero proprietary OS APIs. When compiling for headless microcontrollers (such as the Arduino Mega or ESP32) using the -DNOSDL2 macro, this instruction routes all its graphical or I/O side effects through the Platform Abstraction Layer (PAL). Hardware implementers must ensure that platformsleep() and platformgetticks() are properly mapped in core/platform.c if this keyword involves timing, yielding, or hardware-level interrupts. In cases where the underlying hardware lacks a floating-point unit (FPU), the lexer automatically maps numeric outputs to 32-bit fixed integer types if -DBPPNOFLOAT is enforced.

11. Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) Life Cycle
During the parsing phase, the Recursive Descent Parser encounters the token associated with this keyword. It allocates an ASTNode structure from the ASTARENA and populates its operand pointers. At runtime, the astinterpreter.c engine performs a post-order traversal to evaluate all child expression nodes before triggering the final execution hook. This two-pass system guarantees that syntax errors (like mismatched parentheses or missing commas) are caught globally before any destructive side-effects occur. Once parsed, the ASTNode resides in memory until NEW or RUN is executed, at which point the entire arena is zeroed out to prevent memory leaks.

12. C17 Standard Safety & Security Boundaries
Security and isolation are paramount. This keyword utilizes strict bounds-checking to prevent buffer overflows. Internally, any array indexing or string manipulation defaults to sizet for addressing, preventing negative index wraps. Stack-smashing protections are enforced virtually by the MAXCALL_STACK limit defined in config.h. Any attempt by this keyword to access unallocated heap memory will trigger the interpreter's internal fault handler, raising a trappable BASIC error rather than causing a segmentation fault at the OS level.

13. Deterministic Execution & Regression Prevention
To prevent regressions across builds (Windows, Linux, or MCU), the execution of this keyword is entirely deterministic. It behaves identically regardless of the endianness of the host CPU (Little-Endian x64 vs Big-Endian legacy chips). The testing suite in selftests_all.c ensures that the byte-for-byte output of this operation remains identical. If a developer modifies the underlying C source code for this keyword, they MUST run the SELFTEST suite to verify that parsing precedence, token mapping, and garbage collection behavior have not drifted.

14. Performance Profiling & Optimization Rules
For developers writing performance-critical algorithms in BASIC++, be aware that calling this keyword inside a FOR...NEXT or WHILE...WEND loop incurs a minimal virtual dispatch overhead. Because the interpreter uses a switch-case dispatch engine in exec.c, the branch predictor on modern CPUs will optimize repeated calls. However, on 8-bit or 16-bit chips, minimizing the use of string-mutating variants of this keyword will drastically improve frame rates and execution speed.