CHECK

1. Syntax & Parameters
CHECK

2. Description & Usage
Examines the user's program currently in memory and performs a comprehensive multi-pass static analysis to identify potential errors, warnings, structural anomalies, and unreachable code without actually executing the program. 
Usage: It acts as an advanced built-in linting tool to ensure that code blocks are structurally sound. It checks variable usage, unreachable jumps, missing line numbers for GOTO and GOSUB, and mismatching FOR/NEXT or WHILE/WEND loops.
Edge Cases: If a GOTO target is dynamically computed (which is rare but possible in some dialects), CHECK may flag it as unreachable. Programs with complex nested loops that exit prematurely might trigger warnings about unbalanced stacks. Empty programs will pass checks silently.
Behavior Constraints: CHECK performs static analysis only; it does not execute code, evaluate expressions, or modify the program state or variables.

3. Code Examples
`basic
10 PRINT "START"
20 GOTO 40
30 PRINT "UNREACHABLE"
`
Execution: Typing CHECK will output a warning that line 40 does not exist and that line 30 is unreachable code.

`basic
10 FOR I = 1 TO 10
20 PRINT I
30 WEND
`
Execution: CHECK will flag a mismatched loop structure because WEND is found instead of NEXT I.

4. Internal C-Source Mapping
- source/debug.c (piparsecheck)
- source/check.h and source/check.c (check_program)

5. Implementation Details
The CHECK command performs multiple sequential passes over the rt->program Abstract Syntax Tree (AST): 
- Pass 1: Validates all literal GOTO and GOSUB targets against the internal line number index.
- Pass 2: Matches FOR statements with corresponding NEXT statements, ensuring variable names match if provided.
- Pass 3: Matches WHILE and WEND pairs.
- Pass 4: Analyzes variable initialization and usage, looking for uninitialized reads.
- Pass 5: Balances DATA and READ statements across the program.
- Pass 6: Validates DEF FN function definitions and calls.
- Pass 7: Evaluates overall reachability and calculates cyclomatic complexity for the program.
Struct Mutations: None. The operation is entirely read-only with respect to BASICVMSTATE and the AST. It only mutates local analysis state variables.
Error States: Does not halt the program or generate runtime errors; instead, it streams formatted warnings and errors to standard output.
What can/cannot be changed: The order of the passes is important for performance but not strictly required. The static analysis is isolated from the runtime evaluator to prevent accidental state modification.

6. Cross-References / See Also
- VERIFY
- TRON
- TROFF

7. Historical Context
Unlike standard GW-BASIC or QBASIC which relied strictly on runtime errors (e.g., encountering a missing label during execution), BASIC++ introduces CHECK as a pre-execution safety net. It is heavily inspired by modern IDE linters and brings true static analysis to the BASIC environment.

8. Manual Testing Guide
1. Launch basicpp-console.exe.
2. Type 10 GOTO 100 and press ENTER.
3. Type CHECK and press ENTER.
4. Verify that the static analyzer reports a missing line target for line 100.

9. Memory Management & Garbage Collection Profile
Under the hood, this keyword operates within the strict bounds of the BASIC++ deterministic memory manager (core/memory.c). When executed, any intermediate strings generated by this operation are routed to the Transient Memory Arena within the String Pool (core/stringpool.c). If the arena exceeds its high-water mark, an aggressive mark-and-sweep garbage collection pass is immediately triggered before the instruction completes. On embedded architectures (compiled with -DBPPLITEBUILD), this transient arena is statically clamped (default 4KB), meaning iterative loops invoking this keyword must be designed carefully to avoid ERROUTOF_MEMORY traps. Developers porting to bare-metal systems must verify that the memory.c heap allocator correctly points to a continuous SRAM block without fragmentation.

10. Portability & Hardware Porting Concerns
Because BASIC++ is strictly C17 ISO/IEC 9899:2018 compliant, this keyword relies on zero proprietary OS APIs. When compiling for headless microcontrollers (such as the Arduino Mega or ESP32) using the -DNOSDL2 macro, this instruction routes all its graphical or I/O side effects through the Platform Abstraction Layer (PAL). Hardware implementers must ensure that platformsleep() and platformgetticks() are properly mapped in core/platform.c if this keyword involves timing, yielding, or hardware-level interrupts. In cases where the underlying hardware lacks a floating-point unit (FPU), the lexer automatically maps numeric outputs to 32-bit fixed integer types if -DBPPNOFLOAT is enforced.

11. Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) Life Cycle
During the parsing phase, the Recursive Descent Parser encounters the token associated with this keyword. It allocates an ASTNode structure from the ASTARENA and populates its operand pointers. At runtime, the astinterpreter.c engine performs a post-order traversal to evaluate all child expression nodes before triggering the final execution hook. This two-pass system guarantees that syntax errors (like mismatched parentheses or missing commas) are caught globally before any destructive side-effects occur. Once parsed, the ASTNode resides in memory until NEW or RUN is executed, at which point the entire arena is zeroed out to prevent memory leaks.

12. C17 Standard Safety & Security Boundaries
Security and isolation are paramount. This keyword utilizes strict bounds-checking to prevent buffer overflows. Internally, any array indexing or string manipulation defaults to sizet for addressing, preventing negative index wraps. Stack-smashing protections are enforced virtually by the MAXCALL_STACK limit defined in config.h. Any attempt by this keyword to access unallocated heap memory will trigger the interpreter's internal fault handler, raising a trappable BASIC error rather than causing a segmentation fault at the OS level.

13. Deterministic Execution & Regression Prevention
To prevent regressions across builds (Windows, Linux, or MCU), the execution of this keyword is entirely deterministic. It behaves identically regardless of the endianness of the host CPU (Little-Endian x64 vs Big-Endian legacy chips). The testing suite in selftests_all.c ensures that the byte-for-byte output of this operation remains identical. If a developer modifies the underlying C source code for this keyword, they MUST run the SELFTEST suite to verify that parsing precedence, token mapping, and garbage collection behavior have not drifted.

14. Performance Profiling & Optimization Rules
For developers writing performance-critical algorithms in BASIC++, be aware that calling this keyword inside a FOR...NEXT or WHILE...WEND loop incurs a minimal virtual dispatch overhead. Because the interpreter uses a switch-case dispatch engine in exec.c, the branch predictor on modern CPUs will optimize repeated calls. However, on 8-bit or 16-bit chips, minimizing the use of string-mutating variants of this keyword will drastically improve frame rates and execution speed.