DUMP

1. Syntax & Parameters
DUMP

2. Description & Usage
The DUMP command provides a low-level, comprehensive output of the BASIC++ virtual machine's internal state.
Usage: It is an advanced diagnostic and debugging tool that outputs the current status of the symbol table, memory allocations, string pool usage, the call stack, and internal VM registers. It is incredibly useful for compiler developers and advanced users diagnosing memory leaks or variable state corruption.
Edge Cases: Calling DUMP on a massive program with thousands of variables will generate an enormous amount of console output. It may cause the console buffer to overflow. 
Behavior Constraints: DUMP is a read-only command. It pauses REPL interaction while printing but does not change the state of the program.

3. Code Examples
`basic
10 A = 100
20 B$ = "TEST"
30 DUMP
`
Execution: Prints the internal VM state, including the fact that A is a numeric variable holding 100, and B$ is a string variable pointing to the string pool containing "TEST".

4. Internal C-Source Mapping
- source/parser/debug.c (Parsing KW_DUMP)
- source/virtual/dump.c (Implementation of vmdumpstate)

5. Implementation Details
The DUMP instruction is matched by the KW_DUMP token.
Struct Mutations: It performs a read-only traversal of the rt (Runtime State) struct, including rt->symtable (variables), rt->stringpool (allocated strings), and rt->call_stack (active GOSUB returns).
Error States: If internal pointers are corrupted, DUMP could theoretically segfault, but it implements safe-read boundaries to gracefully report corrupted nodes instead of crashing.
What can/cannot be changed: The output format of DUMP is strictly plain text designed for debugging. Do not introduce pagination or interactive prompts into DUMP, as it is frequently redirected to log files.
Architecture: It iterates through the hash map of the symbol table and prints the raw byte representation and typing information of EVAL_RESULT nodes.

6. Cross-References / See Also
- VARS
- CHECK
- FRE

7. Historical Context
While standard BASIC dialects lacked a native DUMP command, forcing users to manually PRINT variables or use DEF SEG and PEEK, BASIC++ provides DUMP to align with modern virtual machine introspection tools.

8. Manual Testing Guide
1. Launch basicpp-console.exe.
2. Type A = 42 and press ENTER.
3. Type DUMP and press ENTER.
4. Verify that the console outputs the internal VM state, and that the variable A is listed with a value of 42.

9. Memory Management & Garbage Collection Profile
Under the hood, this keyword operates within the strict bounds of the BASIC++ deterministic memory manager (core/memory.c). When executed, any intermediate strings generated by this operation are routed to the Transient Memory Arena within the String Pool (core/stringpool.c). If the arena exceeds its high-water mark, an aggressive mark-and-sweep garbage collection pass is immediately triggered before the instruction completes. On embedded architectures (compiled with -DBPPLITEBUILD), this transient arena is statically clamped (default 4KB), meaning iterative loops invoking this keyword must be designed carefully to avoid ERROUTOF_MEMORY traps. Developers porting to bare-metal systems must verify that the memory.c heap allocator correctly points to a continuous SRAM block without fragmentation.

10. Portability & Hardware Porting Concerns
Because BASIC++ is strictly C17 ISO/IEC 9899:2018 compliant, this keyword relies on zero proprietary OS APIs. When compiling for headless microcontrollers (such as the Arduino Mega or ESP32) using the -DNOSDL2 macro, this instruction routes all its graphical or I/O side effects through the Platform Abstraction Layer (PAL). Hardware implementers must ensure that platformsleep() and platformgetticks() are properly mapped in core/platform.c if this keyword involves timing, yielding, or hardware-level interrupts. In cases where the underlying hardware lacks a floating-point unit (FPU), the lexer automatically maps numeric outputs to 32-bit fixed integer types if -DBPPNOFLOAT is enforced.

11. Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) Life Cycle
During the parsing phase, the Recursive Descent Parser encounters the token associated with this keyword. It allocates an ASTNode structure from the ASTARENA and populates its operand pointers. At runtime, the astinterpreter.c engine performs a post-order traversal to evaluate all child expression nodes before triggering the final execution hook. This two-pass system guarantees that syntax errors (like mismatched parentheses or missing commas) are caught globally before any destructive side-effects occur. Once parsed, the ASTNode resides in memory until NEW or RUN is executed, at which point the entire arena is zeroed out to prevent memory leaks.

12. C17 Standard Safety & Security Boundaries
Security and isolation are paramount. This keyword utilizes strict bounds-checking to prevent buffer overflows. Internally, any array indexing or string manipulation defaults to sizet for addressing, preventing negative index wraps. Stack-smashing protections are enforced virtually by the MAXCALL_STACK limit defined in config.h. Any attempt by this keyword to access unallocated heap memory will trigger the interpreter's internal fault handler, raising a trappable BASIC error rather than causing a segmentation fault at the OS level.

13. Deterministic Execution & Regression Prevention
To prevent regressions across builds (Windows, Linux, or MCU), the execution of this keyword is entirely deterministic. It behaves identically regardless of the endianness of the host CPU (Little-Endian x64 vs Big-Endian legacy chips). The testing suite in selftests_all.c ensures that the byte-for-byte output of this operation remains identical. If a developer modifies the underlying C source code for this keyword, they MUST run the SELFTEST suite to verify that parsing precedence, token mapping, and garbage collection behavior have not drifted.

14. Performance Profiling & Optimization Rules
For developers writing performance-critical algorithms in BASIC++, be aware that calling this keyword inside a FOR...NEXT or WHILE...WEND loop incurs a minimal virtual dispatch overhead. Because the interpreter uses a switch-case dispatch engine in exec.c, the branch predictor on modern CPUs will optimize repeated calls. However, on 8-bit or 16-bit chips, minimizing the use of string-mutating variants of this keyword will drastically improve frame rates and execution speed.