VERIFY

1. Syntax & Parameters
VERIFY "path/to/file.BAS"

- "path/to/file.BAS": A required string literal or string variable representing the path to the BASIC source file to be analyzed.

2. Description & Usage
The VERIFY command performs a complete static analysis of a specified BASIC source file without loading it into the active program workspace. This allows the user to audit external files for syntax errors, structural integrity, and missing line numbers safely.
Usage: Ideal for Continuous Integration (CI/CD) pipelines or when you want to validate a program's correctness before running or merging it.
Edge Cases & Boundary Conditions: 
- If the file path is empty (""), it returns an ERRFILENOTFOUND or ERRBADFILENAME.
- If the file exceeds MAXPROGRAMLINES, it returns an ERROUTOF_MEMORY.
- Parsing complex string paths with escape characters or very long paths might trigger buffer overflow protections if not handled cleanly by the OS layer.
Syntax Combinations: Can be used dynamically with string variables, e.g., A$ = "TEST.BAS" : VERIFY A$.

3. Code Examples
`basic
10 REM Basic Verification
20 VERIFY "TEST.BAS"
30 REM Using variables
40 F$ = "MODULE1.BAS"
50 VERIFY F$
`

4. Internal C-Source Mapping
Implemented in debug.c (piparseverify) and check.h.

5. Implementation Details
The VERIFY command dynamically allocates a temporary ProgramStore structure of size MAXPROGRAMLINES. 
Execution Paths: The Lexer identifies KWVERIFY. The string argument is evaluated and passed to the VFS (Virtual File System) to resolve the absolute path. A temporary program buffer is allocated. The target file is read and parsed into this buffer. runstatic_analysis() is executed on this temporary AST. 
Struct Mutations: The temporary ProgramStore is heavily mutated during parsing, but the main runtime ProgramStore (pointed to by rt->program) remains completely isolated and untouched. Upon completion (success or error), the temporary ProgramStore is freed via freeprogramstore().
Troubleshooting: If VERIFY crashes, verify that MAXPROGRAMLINES is respected and the system has sufficient heap memory for the temporary allocation.

6. Cross-References / See Also
CHECK, LOAD, TRACE

7. Historical Context
A unique feature to BASIC++ designed for CI/CD pipelines and batch testing of external scripts before execution, ensuring that bad code isn't inadvertently run or loaded over working programs. Not found in standard GW-BASIC or QBASIC.

8. Manual Testing Guide
1. Launch basicpp-console.exe.
2. Create a dummy file containing a deliberate error: 10 PRINT "HELLO" : 20 GOTO 500 : SAVE "DUMMY.BAS".
3. Clear memory with NEW.
4. Type VERIFY "DUMMY.BAS". The interpreter should output a missing line error for 500.
5. Type LIST. The memory should be completely empty, proving VERIFY did not load DUMMY.BAS.

9. Memory Management & Garbage Collection Profile
Under the hood, this keyword operates within the strict bounds of the BASIC++ deterministic memory manager (core/memory.c). When executed, any intermediate strings generated by this operation are routed to the Transient Memory Arena within the String Pool (core/stringpool.c). If the arena exceeds its high-water mark, an aggressive mark-and-sweep garbage collection pass is immediately triggered before the instruction completes. On embedded architectures (compiled with -DBPPLITEBUILD), this transient arena is statically clamped (default 4KB), meaning iterative loops invoking this keyword must be designed carefully to avoid ERROUTOF_MEMORY traps. Developers porting to bare-metal systems must verify that the memory.c heap allocator correctly points to a continuous SRAM block without fragmentation.

10. Portability & Hardware Porting Concerns
Because BASIC++ is strictly C17 ISO/IEC 9899:2018 compliant, this keyword relies on zero proprietary OS APIs. When compiling for headless microcontrollers (such as the Arduino Mega or ESP32) using the -DNOSDL2 macro, this instruction routes all its graphical or I/O side effects through the Platform Abstraction Layer (PAL). Hardware implementers must ensure that platformsleep() and platformgetticks() are properly mapped in core/platform.c if this keyword involves timing, yielding, or hardware-level interrupts. In cases where the underlying hardware lacks a floating-point unit (FPU), the lexer automatically maps numeric outputs to 32-bit fixed integer types if -DBPPNOFLOAT is enforced.

11. Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) Life Cycle
During the parsing phase, the Recursive Descent Parser encounters the token associated with this keyword. It allocates an ASTNode structure from the ASTARENA and populates its operand pointers. At runtime, the astinterpreter.c engine performs a post-order traversal to evaluate all child expression nodes before triggering the final execution hook. This two-pass system guarantees that syntax errors (like mismatched parentheses or missing commas) are caught globally before any destructive side-effects occur. Once parsed, the ASTNode resides in memory until NEW or RUN is executed, at which point the entire arena is zeroed out to prevent memory leaks.

12. C17 Standard Safety & Security Boundaries
Security and isolation are paramount. This keyword utilizes strict bounds-checking to prevent buffer overflows. Internally, any array indexing or string manipulation defaults to sizet for addressing, preventing negative index wraps. Stack-smashing protections are enforced virtually by the MAXCALL_STACK limit defined in config.h. Any attempt by this keyword to access unallocated heap memory will trigger the interpreter's internal fault handler, raising a trappable BASIC error rather than causing a segmentation fault at the OS level.

13. Deterministic Execution & Regression Prevention
To prevent regressions across builds (Windows, Linux, or MCU), the execution of this keyword is entirely deterministic. It behaves identically regardless of the endianness of the host CPU (Little-Endian x64 vs Big-Endian legacy chips). The testing suite in selftests_all.c ensures that the byte-for-byte output of this operation remains identical. If a developer modifies the underlying C source code for this keyword, they MUST run the SELFTEST suite to verify that parsing precedence, token mapping, and garbage collection behavior have not drifted.

14. Performance Profiling & Optimization Rules
For developers writing performance-critical algorithms in BASIC++, be aware that calling this keyword inside a FOR...NEXT or WHILE...WEND loop incurs a minimal virtual dispatch overhead. Because the interpreter uses a switch-case dispatch engine in exec.c, the branch predictor on modern CPUs will optimize repeated calls. However, on 8-bit or 16-bit chips, minimizing the use of string-mutating variants of this keyword will drastically improve frame rates and execution speed.