END

1. Syntax & Parameters
END [exit_code]
- exit_code (Optional): A numeric expression representing the return code back to the operating system (in non-interactive modes).

2. Description & Usage
The END command unconditionally terminates the execution of a running BASIC++ program, closes all open file channels, flushes output buffers, and returns the interpreter to immediate mode (or exits to the OS if running as a script).
While STOP merely suspends execution (allowing CONT), END completely finalizes the program state.

Edge Cases & Boundary Conditions:
- Type Coercion and Overflows: If an exitcode is provided as a floating-point number, it will be implicitly truncated to an integer. Extreme boundary values (e.g., numbers exceeding 32-bit signed integer limits) will trigger runtime deterministic trapping (ERROVERFLOW).
- Open File Channels: END invokes an automatic garbage collection and cleanup pass. If there are pending writes in standard I/O file buffers, END guarantees they are flushed to disk before the file handles are closed via platform abstraction layers.
- Nested Execution: If END is encountered inside a nested subroutine (GOSUB), an error handler, or a FOR...NEXT loop, the call stack is immediately unwound and destroyed. Return pointers are discarded.
- End of File: If the instruction pointer reaches the physical end of the file/AST without encountering an END statement, an implicit END is automatically executed.

3. Code Examples
Example 1: Standard Termination
`basic
10 PRINT "Executing..."
20 END
30 PRINT "This will never print."
`

Example 2: Returning an Exit Code to the OS
`basic
10 ERROR_FLAG = 1
20 IF ERROR_FLAG = 1 THEN END 1 ELSE END 0
`

Complex Syntax Combinations:
`basic
10 ON ERROR GOTO 100
20 ERROR 50
100 PRINT "Fatal Error Encountered."
110 END 255
`

4. Internal C-Source Mapping
- Lexer: source/parser/lexer.c (KW_END)
- AST Node: source/parser/ast.c (STMT_END)
- Runtime Execution: source/progmgmt/parserprogmgmt.c -> piparse_end()

5. Implementation Details
The runtime parser evaluates the instruction and delegates to the interpreter state engine. 
When piparseend() is invoked, it sets the global execution flag interp->state = STATEIDLE. It then iterates through the interp->filechannels array, calling standard C library fclose() (wrapped in platformfileclose()) on any open handles. Finally, it frees the subroutine call stack and clears the transient memory arena used for loop contexts.

Struct Mutations:
The InterpreterState struct undergoes significant mutation. callstackptr is reset to 0. All FileChannel structs have their isopen boolean set to false. The ASTNode representing the END statement is evaluated. If an exit code is present, evalexpr() assigns the numeric value into a Value union (val.type = VALINT), which is then passed to the OS exit routine if applicable.

Troubleshooting Scenarios & Error States:
- ERRTYPEMISMATCH: Thrown if the exit_code parameter is a string expression instead of a numeric one.
- ERROUTOF_BOUNDS: Thrown if the exit code exceeds platform-specific exit code limits (e.g., typically 0-255 on POSIX).
- Modification Constraints: 
  - What CAN be changed: The internal file flushing mechanism can be optimized for block writes.
  - What CANNOT be changed: END must never deallocate variables from the symbol table. Variables must remain queryable from the REPL after an END.

6. Cross-References / See Also
STOP, SYSTEM, RUN, CLEAR

7. Historical Context
Fully compatible with GW-BASIC and ECMA-116 standard structural management commands. In GW-BASIC, END did not accept an exit code; BASIC++ extends this functionality to better support modern scripting environments and bash/batch pipelines.

8. Manual Testing Guide
1. Launch basicpp-console.exe from your terminal.
2. Type: 10 PRINT "Hello"
3. Type: 20 END
4. Type: 30 PRINT "World"
5. Type RUN and press Enter.
6. Verify that only "Hello" is printed and the interpreter returns to the Ok prompt without printing "World".

9. Memory Management & Garbage Collection Profile
Under the hood, this keyword operates within the strict bounds of the BASIC++ deterministic memory manager (core/memory.c). When executed, any intermediate strings generated by this operation are routed to the Transient Memory Arena within the String Pool (core/stringpool.c). If the arena exceeds its high-water mark, an aggressive mark-and-sweep garbage collection pass is immediately triggered before the instruction completes. On embedded architectures (compiled with -DBPPLITEBUILD), this transient arena is statically clamped (default 4KB), meaning iterative loops invoking this keyword must be designed carefully to avoid ERROUTOF_MEMORY traps. Developers porting to bare-metal systems must verify that the memory.c heap allocator correctly points to a continuous SRAM block without fragmentation.

10. Portability & Hardware Porting Concerns
Because BASIC++ is strictly C17 ISO/IEC 9899:2018 compliant, this keyword relies on zero proprietary OS APIs. When compiling for headless microcontrollers (such as the Arduino Mega or ESP32) using the -DNOSDL2 macro, this instruction routes all its graphical or I/O side effects through the Platform Abstraction Layer (PAL). Hardware implementers must ensure that platformsleep() and platformgetticks() are properly mapped in core/platform.c if this keyword involves timing, yielding, or hardware-level interrupts. In cases where the underlying hardware lacks a floating-point unit (FPU), the lexer automatically maps numeric outputs to 32-bit fixed integer types if -DBPPNOFLOAT is enforced.

11. Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) Life Cycle
During the parsing phase, the Recursive Descent Parser encounters the token associated with this keyword. It allocates an ASTNode structure from the ASTARENA and populates its operand pointers. At runtime, the astinterpreter.c engine performs a post-order traversal to evaluate all child expression nodes before triggering the final execution hook. This two-pass system guarantees that syntax errors (like mismatched parentheses or missing commas) are caught globally before any destructive side-effects occur. Once parsed, the ASTNode resides in memory until NEW or RUN is executed, at which point the entire arena is zeroed out to prevent memory leaks.

12. C17 Standard Safety & Security Boundaries
Security and isolation are paramount. This keyword utilizes strict bounds-checking to prevent buffer overflows. Internally, any array indexing or string manipulation defaults to sizet for addressing, preventing negative index wraps. Stack-smashing protections are enforced virtually by the MAXCALL_STACK limit defined in config.h. Any attempt by this keyword to access unallocated heap memory will trigger the interpreter's internal fault handler, raising a trappable BASIC error rather than causing a segmentation fault at the OS level.

13. Deterministic Execution & Regression Prevention
To prevent regressions across builds (Windows, Linux, or MCU), the execution of this keyword is entirely deterministic. It behaves identically regardless of the endianness of the host CPU (Little-Endian x64 vs Big-Endian legacy chips). The testing suite in selftests_all.c ensures that the byte-for-byte output of this operation remains identical. If a developer modifies the underlying C source code for this keyword, they MUST run the SELFTEST suite to verify that parsing precedence, token mapping, and garbage collection behavior have not drifted.

14. Performance Profiling & Optimization Rules
For developers writing performance-critical algorithms in BASIC++, be aware that calling this keyword inside a FOR...NEXT or WHILE...WEND loop incurs a minimal virtual dispatch overhead. Because the interpreter uses a switch-case dispatch engine in exec.c, the branch predictor on modern CPUs will optimize repeated calls. However, on 8-bit or 16-bit chips, minimizing the use of string-mutating variants of this keyword will drastically improve frame rates and execution speed.